An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice
Architectures
RODRIGO LAIGNER, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
ANA CAROLINA ALMEIDA∗ , State University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
WESLEY K. G. ASSUNÇÃO, North Carolina State University, USA
YONGLUAN ZHOU, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

arXiv:2408.00440v1 [cs.SE] 1 Aug 2024

Microservices emerged as a popular architectural style over the last decade. Although microservices are designed to be self-contained,
they must communicate to realize business capabilities, creating dependencies among their data and functionalities. Developers then
resort to asynchronous, event-based communication to fulfill such dependencies while reducing coupling. However, developers are
often oblivious to the inherent challenges of the asynchronous and event-based paradigm, leading to frustrations and ultimately
making them reconsider the adoption of microservices. To make matters worse, there is a scarcity of literature on the practices and
challenges of designing, implementing, testing, monitoring, and troubleshooting event-based microservices.
To fill this gap, this paper provides the first comprehensive characterization of event management practices and challenges in
microservices based on a repository mining study of over 8000 Stack Overflow questions. Moreover, 628 relevant questions were
randomly sampled for an in-depth manual investigation of challenges. We find that developers encounter many problems, including
large event payloads, modeling event schemas, auditing event flows, and ordering constraints in processing events. This suggests
that developers are not sufficiently served by state-of-the-practice technologies. We provide actionable implications to developers,
technology providers, and researchers to advance event management in microservices.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization → Distributed architectures; • Software and its engineering;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: microservice, asynchronous, event, streams, pubsub, decoupling, event-driven architecture, eda
ACM Reference Format:
Rodrigo Laigner, Ana Carolina Almeida, Wesley K. G. Assunção, and Yongluan Zhou. 2024. An Empirical Study on Challenges of
Event Management in Microservice Architectures. In Proceedings of Make sure to enter the correct conference title from your rights
confirmation emai (Conference acronym ’XX). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 40 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

1

INTRODUCTION

The emergence of cloud computing as a paradigm for large-scale deployment of services has prompted industry
practitioners to rethink how applications are architected and deployed [5]. In particular, we witness a growing adoption
of microservice architectures [130]. Microservice architectures promote designing components as independent building
blocks that are deployed independently and interact with each other via network protocols [41]. This architectural style
∗ Work done while employed as a postdoc at the University of Copenhagen.

Authors’ Contact Information: Rodrigo Laigner, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, rnl@di.ku.dk; Ana Carolina Almeida, State University
of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, ana.almeida@ime.uerj.br; Wesley K. G. Assunção, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA,
wguezas@ncsu.edu; Yongluan Zhou, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, zhou@di.ku.dk.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Manuscript submitted to ACM

1

2

Laigner et al.

brings more flexibility for the development and deployment of large systems, in contrast to conventional architectures,
in which software components are strongly coupled with each other and deployed as a whole unit [73].
The main benefit of microservices is that development teams can develop and operate their services independently [120]. Microservices should be designed as self-contained software units that operate autonomously [73]. To
realize business capabilities, microservices need to communicate, which ends up creating dependencies among their
data and functionalities [59]. To manage such dependencies while maximizing decoupling, developers often rely on
asynchronous event-based communication between microservices, instead of using traditional remote procedure
calls [56, 58, 78]. The rationale is that, through events, producers and consumers are not directly coupled. For instance,
producer microservices can trigger operations in other microservices or communicate their own state updates through
events. Such an approach may positively influence the application’s ability to evolve over time, limit the propagation of
faults, and favor increased scalability of individual components [56, 83].
Event-driven architecture has been rapidly gaining industry popularity [15]. However, despite the benefits of an
event-driven design, developers frequently report challenges in managing events in industrial settings [20, 35, 44, 58,
59, 75, 76, 78, 97, 98, 101, 102, 125]. Not surprisingly, it is common to encounter developers seeking support on how
to implement event-driven microservices appropriately, such as this comment found on Stack Overflow (a popular
Questions&Answers forum) [28]: “Implementing an eventually consistent distributed architecture has turned out to be a
pain. There are tons of blog posts telling stories about how to do it, but not showing (code) how to actually do it. One of the
aspects I’m suffering is having to deal with manual retries of the messages when they haven’t been acknowledged.” To make
matters worse, in our study, we observed that there is a scarcity of literature on the practices and challenges that the
adoption of an asynchronous paradigm brings to the designing, implementing, testing, monitoring, and troubleshooting
of microservices. The challenges of managing communication in asynchronous and event-based systems have been
explored in the fields of databases and distributed systems [17, 115], but this knowledge is not widely disseminated
among developers [13, 59], making them sometimes try to “reinvent the wheel” when addressing common challenges.
This limited understanding of existing practices and how to address challenges in architectures based on asynchronous
communication leads to frustrations and ultimately makes companies reconsider the adoption of microservices.1
There has been extensive work investigating the adoption and implications of microservice architectures [9, 34,
59, 68, 71, 89, 114, 118, 119, 127, 129]. However, these pieces of work mostly focus on REST (representational state
transfer) architectural style, describe the benefits of using microservices, or characterize data management and security
practices without a holistic view of the practices and challenges. Furthermore, studies target specific companies or a
limited number of practitioners, reducing the generalizability of their findings. To the best of our knowledge, no work
has systematically investigated the practice and challenges brought about by an event-driven design in microservice
architectures. As a result, although event-driven microservices form an important portion of microservice deployments
today [59, 119], it is unclear what particular challenges developers face when developing and operating them. The need
to address these issues is even more relevant when we consider studies suggesting there is a tension between the use of
asynchronous microservice designs and application safety [59].
This work aims to characterize the practices and challenges faced by developers when adopting event-based
microservice architectures. More specifically, we first investigate the practices adopted by developers to manage events
in microservice architectures. We aim to comprehend current technological trends and common implementation
patterns related to the adoption of event management. We also seek to identify the functional and non-functional
1 Recent empirical studies have reported cases of companies moving from microservices back to monoliths [67, 106].

Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

3

requirements that are met or supported by implementing event management in microservices. Secondly, we want
to identify recurrent challenges faced by developers when managing events in microservice architectures. Focusing
on these two perspectives, we can equip developers with knowledge of existing practices for event management in
microservices and make them aware of the challenges they will face when developing asynchronous and event-based
microservices.
To achieve our goal, we perform, to the best of our knowledge, the first empirical study to comprehend the practice
and identify the challenges in managing events in microservice architectures from developers’ perspective. To this
end, our study is based on repository mining [45]. We mine and analyze relevant questions from Stack Overflow (SO),2
one of the most popular Questions&Answers forums for developers who seek technical advice or assistance [19]. We
collect more than 8,000 SO questions associated with managing events in microservice architectures, ensuring the
diversity, representativeness, and quality of our dataset. Via a mix of keyword analysis and manual examination of tags,
questions, and related responses (i.e., posts), we collect the most popular patterns and non-functional and functional
requirements mentioned in the context of event management in microservices. Then, we randomly sample 624 relevant
SO questions for manual analysis to identify the challenges. We carefully extract the challenges behind each question
through a peer-reviewed process. We classify the uncovered challenges into different properties of distributed systems
and functional and non-functional requirements. These ultimately represent key areas that microservice developers
struggle with.
In the quantitative analysis, we observe that event management has been gaining increasing attention in practice,
indicating the emergence of this architectural paradigm and the timeliness of this study. Results show the popularity
of patterns and requirements related to achieving data consistency and loose coupling. This suggests microservice
developers seek to strike a better balance between consistency and decoupling in their microservice architectures by
employing asynchronous events, especially in computations that span microservices. Furthermore, we observe that
developers report different categories of patterns in their implementations. For instance, observability (e.g., distributed
tracing), performance (e.g., circuit breaker), and security (e.g., access token) patterns are reported being applied in
questions involving event management.
In the qualitative analysis, we find that microservice practitioners face a myriad of challenges in managing events.
While events are supposed to maximize the decoupling of microservices [38, 58], developers often surprisingly necessitate
synchronizing events for correct event processing and coordinating microservices to allow for software evolution,
contradicting the alleged benefits of an event-based architecture [39, 83]. Besides, although events can serve as natural
progress markers of microservices [39, 56], we observe that developers find little benefit in using events to monitor and
troubleshoot microservices. In particular, developers have a hard time tracking down the result of their computations,
which often span a network of dependent microservices and exhibit additional difficulties in replaying past events
for debugging purposes. Safeguarding security properties is also an emerging challenge in event-based microservice
architectures. Developers struggle to synchronize event management and security technologies to ensure that only
events generated by secured channels are processed and that only authenticated microservices can consume them.
This paper’s contributions are manifold. We evidence that microservice developers are insufficiently served by
state-of-the-practice technologies, including messaging systems, frameworks, databases, and cloud providers. They
end up implementing their own ad hoc solutions to fulfill their requirements, which ultimately leads to errors and
bugs, rendering adoption of a microservice architecture frustrating. Characterizing this emerging practice well informs
2 https://stackoverflow.com/

Manuscript submitted to ACM

4

Laigner et al.

general software developers, especially those unfamiliar with the challenges of designing distributed systems, about the
hidden dangers of asynchronous, event-based microservice designs. We derive actionable implications for each class of
event management challenges to researchers and message, database, cloud, and framework providers. These relate
but are not limited to, devising novel microservice programming models, event management architectures, tools, and
methods to advance the state-of-the-art practice in managing events in microservice architectures, making this a timely
and valuable study. Furthermore, the results of our work can benefit different stakeholders involved in the development
and management of event-driven microservice architectures:
• For practitioners: the challenges reinforce the importance of reliable sources of information and the need for
careful analysis of the documentation of the technologies they adopt. Practitioners should question gray literature
with general and high-level instructions that often do not embrace the complex nature of problems faced in
production settings. Practitioners should not overlook problem-prevention measures, which include running,
testing, and deploying their applications under the expected workload prior to production. Besides, developers
must be cautious about “reinventing-the-wheel” approaches, since for every possible design attempt, there are
reports of previous attempts.
• For researchers: software engineering, system engineering, and database communities must work closely to
each other. Leveraging the knowledge from other fields can help developers address their challenges. Software
engineering researchers may find no appropriate solutions for their problems in tools from system engineering,
requiring only appropriate interfaces while safeguarding the application. Also, researchers must embrace/meet
practitioners’ expectations that were analyzed and discussed in the paper, solving real-world problems without
focusing on “in vitro” experiments.
• For tool builders: documentation must pair up with/highlight the problems faced in practice. They should also
provide actions that can be taken to mitigate the shortcomings of the existing tools. Furthermore, vendors must
be clear about what requirements and guarantees cannot be properly achieved.
• For educators: we advise incorporating distributed systems concepts in software engineering courses, in particular
algorithms and systems guarantees and their relationship with modern application development in the cloud. Yet,
training students on how event management relates and makes its presence in modern application architectures,
such as serverless, microservices, SaaS, to name some.
In addition, the dataset used in this study is made available 3 as an additional contribution to the research community,
allowing other researchers to further investigate the theme.
The remainder of this work is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the role of events in modern microservice
architectures and typical issues developers encounter. In Section 3, we present the methodology employed in this work.
Section 4 presents the state of practice. Section 5 presents the specific challenges microservice developers encounter in
managing events and their implications for the research community and industry providers. Section 6 discusses the
threats to validity. Section 7 presents the related work. Lastly, Section 8 concludes this work.
2

BACKGROUND

To discuss the role events play in microservice architectures, we use Figure 1 to illustrate an ecommerce platform. We
base on a popular microservice open-source project [4] that incorporates real-world event processing patterns.
3 https://zenodo.org/records/13149520

Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

5

Fig. 1. Events in a microservice architecture

2.1

Context

Upon a customer’s checkout request, the Cart microservice spawns the execution of a checkout through generating
a checkout_cart event. The event is then consumed by the Order microservice, which processes the cart items and
generates the place_order event. Next, the Payment microservice is responsible for processing the payment and
generating the update_stock and seal_cart events for downstream consumption by the Stock and Cart microservices,
respectively.
It is noteworthy that, in synchronous communication paradigms, such as through REST APIs and RPCs, the requester
microservice gets blocked until the request terminates in the remote microservice and the response is received. It is
natural to deduce that such blocking times can grow arbitrarily when business transactions traverse several microservices.
In the example above, Cart would necessarily wait until Payment terminates the payment processing. Through the
asynchronous paradigm, though, once the checkout_cart event is generated, Cart microservice is free to allocate
computational resources (e.g., threads, CPUs, and memory) to serve other requests. This usually favors higher efficiency
in event processing [72].
As exhibited in Listing 1, the communication through events is only possible because events carry semantic data that
is used by microservices in distinct ways [39]. For instance, although the payment data is sent by the customer in a
checkout request, such data is only used by the Payment microservice. That requires both Cart and Order microservices
to pass along payment data in the checkout_cart and place_order events, respectively.
product_update:{ product_id, type, description, ... }
price_update:{ product_id, old_price, new_price, ... }
checkout_cart:{ customer_id, items:[{ product_id, qty, .. }],
card_num, exp_date, address, discount }
update_stock:{ product_id, qty, timestamp, ... }

Listing 1. Example of application-generated event types

2.2

Problem Statement

Besides the apparent attractiveness of a decoupled design, managing events appropriately renders challenges. As events
are generated asynchronously, that is, producers do not wait for consumers’ reception, developers must account for the
anomalies that possibly arise in event delivery, as described by the microservice adopter Nubank [75]:
Manuscript submitted to ACM

6

Laigner et al.
“you have late-arriving events, you can make a payment that we receive that should be credited on Friday,
we need to time travel back, re-play the events and figuring out the balance that does not invalidate the
invariants we have”
Besides, it is often reported that developers necessitate making sure anomalies in the event order does not lead to

problems in their microservices, as explained by an Uber team [35]:
“If it consumes an event that is not in sequence, our processing logic identifies the version mismatch and
we retry the event a number of times.”
Turning to our example scenario, if price_update events are processed in different orders, that can lead to incorrect
product prices. Besides, supposing that the product_removal is not delivered to and processed by both Order and
Stock, that leads the system to an incorrect state. In addition, if place_order is delivered more than once, that can lead
to overcharging customers. An abnormal burst of events can also pose challenges to the system if consumers cannot
cope with the arrival rate of events. In this work, we delve into these and several other types of challenges that affect
event management in microservice architectures.
3

STUDY DESIGN

Although event-driven microservices are a popular architectural style in industry settings [56, 59, 83], existing studies
mostly outlook the practical implications of adoption and the challenges brought about by an asynchronous and
event-based design to microservices. Thus, the goal of this work is to identify the practices adopted and challenges faced
by practitioners developing software systems using event-driven microservice architectures.
To achieve this goal, our study focus on answering two research question, as follows:
• RQ1. What is the state of the practice on managing events in microservice architectures? Rationale:
Despite the popularity of event-driven microservice architectures, in the literature it is little known on why
practitioners adopt this architectural style. Also, the literature is scarce on describing what are the practices
adopted by them to manage events in microservice architectures, allowing practitioners to understand technological trends and popular implementation patterns associated with event management adoption. Thus, with
this RQ, the insights we want to gain is threefold: (i) Understand the popularity trend of event management in
microservice architectures; (ii) Collect the most popular patterns associated with event management adoption;
(iii) Identify what functional and non-functional requirements are either enabled or facilitated by managing
events in microservices.
• RQ2. What challenges do practitioners encounter when managing events in microservice architectures? Rationale: Once we understand the current practices on developing software systems using event-driven
microservice architectures, we focus on identifying what particular challenges developers face when developing
and operating them. In this question, we delve into the specific issues and impediments microservice developers
face in practice while managing events.
To answer these two research questions, we use Stack Overflow (SO) [104], a popular question-and-answer online
platform where practitioners seek technical assistance on issues they face in their day-to-day activities to understand
the challenges of managing events in microservice architectures. Our methodology is similar to the ones adopted in
previous studies [8, 121, 124] to collect, filter, and analyze questions. However, our focus is on event management in
microservice architectures. We detail the procedure of our study below.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures
3.1

7

Data Collection

3.1.1 Downloading Stack Overflow dataset. We started by downloading the entire Stack Overflow dataset 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑙 from
the official Stack Exchange Data Dump [103] available when we started this study (September 15, 2023). The dataset
includes 23.199.461 questions dated from July 31, 2008 to December 31, 2022.4 Every question in the dataset has title,
body and a “tag” metadata, which denotes the topics on which the question lies.
3.1.2 Exploring initial tag set. We start with a general tag set to include as many relevant questions as possible. Thus, we
use 𝑇𝑖𝑛𝑖 = {“microservice”}, resulting in 8369 questions, from which we performed an exploratory search. We observed
that many questions were unrelated to event management, requiring significant effort to filter out. Also, we observed
that relevant questions would mention the keywords “microservice” and “event” in either the title or body.
3.1.3 Filtering by relevant keywords. With the above insight in mind, we filtered the questions in 𝑇𝑖𝑛𝑖 that contain the
keywords “microservice” and “event” in their title or body, leading to a total of 1407 questions (denoted as 𝑆𝑟𝑒𝑙 ). We
extracted 566 tags from 𝑆𝑟𝑒𝑙 , which we denote as 𝑇𝑘𝑒𝑦 . Table 1 shows the distribution of questions per tag in 𝑆𝑟𝑒𝑙 (only
the tags with five questions or more).
The first two authors jointly examined the candidate tags and observed that many of them relates to techniques,
patterns, and technologies applied to managing events in microservice architectures, such as event-driven architecture,
pubsub, message queue, and event sourcing. Even tags unrelated to event management (e.g., authentication, logging,
and database) were often accompanied by event management-related tags, indicating possible correlated issues. Both
observations gave us the confidence to proceed with further analysis.
3.2

Analyzing the State of the Practice

3.2.1 Patterns Trend. Based on a popular collection of patterns for microservice architectures [92], we extracted from
the questions in 𝑆𝑟𝑒𝑙 the patterns for microservices mentioned by developers. It noteworthy we also included in the
analysis the different users’ posts (i.e., responses) for each question, totaling 3142 entries. We took extra care analyzing
the dataset to embrace all possible forms of writing the same pattern (including typos), synonyms, and acronyms. For
instance, we also identified the pattern "Command Query Responsibility Segregation" (CQRS) via "cqrs" or "CQRS."
Section 4.1 answers RQ1(b).
3.2.2 Non-functional Requirements Trend. We also analyzed the most common non-functional requirements (NFRs)
mentioned by practitioners. We use as reference the NFRs listed in Chung et al. [24]. We started searching keywords
related to NFRs terms in 𝑆𝑟𝑒𝑙 (including posts) and incrementally introduced acronyms and synonyms. After introducing
each keyword, we evaluated randomly selected related questions to validate whether the classification of the NFR fit
the questions’ context. We continued this process until exhausting the set of possible NFRs.
We understand that an NFR keyword search does not necessarily mean that such a requirement is part of the
practitioners’ problem. However, our analysis observed that such cases are often exceptions rather than rules, thus not
undermining the analysis of the most pursued NFRs regarding event management in microservices. We respond to
RQ1(c) in Section 4.2.
3.2.3 Functional Requirements Trend. We were also interested in understanding the specific functional requirements
pursued by practitioners that are either enabled by or facilitated by managing events. Unlike NFRs, though, we noticed
4We excluded the year 2023 from our analysis as it was still a year in progress when this work was carried out

Manuscript submitted to ACM

8

Laigner et al.
Table 1. Relevant tags extracted from Stack Overflow

Tag

#Questions

microservice
architecture
event-sourcing
apache-kafka
domain-driven-design

895
124
90
78
76

cqrs
rabbitmq
event-driven
events

71
54
43
38

event-driven-design

36

design-patterns

31

message-queue

23

Tag
messaging, saga
database
masstransit, publish-subscribe
event-handling, asynchronous
eventual-consistency, soa, distributedtransactions
vert.x, distributed-computing
distributed-system, authentication
redis, google-cloud-pubsub
azure-service-fabric, event-bus, messagebroker, authorization
spring-cloud-stream, system-design,
websocket, azureservicebus, socket.io,
web-services
spring-kafka,
bounded-contexts,
database-design,
event-basedprogramming, aws-lambda, googlecloud-platform, transactions, logging,
amqp
apache-kafka-streams, software-design,
security, identityserver4, integration,
<service>

#Questions
22
20
18
17
15
11
10
9
8
7

6

5

that uncovering functional requirements often necessitated a thorough, detailed analysis to uncover the application
scenario and, consequently, the functional requirement related to event management.
Relevance Filter. Given the high number of questions, manually examining all of them would demand a substantial
amount of time, which could make reporting this study’s evidence in a timely fashion impracticable. Therefore, at this
point, we decided to apply a relevance filter. First, we use a relevance heuristic 𝜈 to filter out questions with tags that
are employed to a much lesser extent compared to others. As previous studies [8, 121], we considered only the tags
whose 𝜈 is higher than 0.005, leading to a set of 1298 questions and 93 associated tags.
# of questions with tag t in 𝑆𝑟𝑒𝑙
# of questions in 𝑆𝑟𝑒𝑙
Next, we focused on prioritizing the analysis of questions tagged with event management technologies (e.g., rabbitmq,
𝜈=

kafka, masstransit) and techniques (e.g., cqrs, event-sourcing, event-handling) rather than questions tagged with
technologies not directly related to event management (e.g., python, java, php, elasticsearch). Although the former also
presents problems in the event management domain, thus part of our problem scope, we observe filtering by related
event management tags led more often to questions revealing challenges within our study scope.
These two filters combined led to 53 tags (shown in Table 1) with a total of 925 questions. To proceed with the manual
examination, we randomly sample 628 questions, which represents more than 2/3 of the relevant questions filtered.
Procedure. We adopt an open coding procedure [99] to analyze the sampled questions to pinpoint the specific functional
requirements sought by practitioners inductively.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

9

The first two authors, both of whom have years of software and data engineering experience, jointly participate in
the manual examination of the questions. They analyze the sampled questions multiple times to familiarize themselves
with them. In this process, many elements of the question were taken into consideration for inspection, including
the title, body, code snippets, URLs, and the author’s responses to other users’ inquiries, which can ultimately clarify
unclear points of the original problem statement (i.e., content in the body).
We observed that the user explicitly expressed the functional requirements being sought in most of the questions.
For instance, in data replication cases, users would often mention that an event is generated based on some update (e.g.,
a user credit card score), so other microservices can also apply this change to their databases (see S3 in Section 4.3).
However, in other cases, the specific functional requirement is not made explicit. For instance, different terms, like
"consistency," are used to denote replicating data as a functional requirement, like the example as follows [122]:
Customer and Order microservice both have customer details, though in Order microservice customer
infos are striped to only required fields. I understand there is a way to maintain consistency of data
across microservices using events.
Therefore, upon clarifying the functional requirement, the authors give terms to represent the requirements of the
questions, using the terms used by developers whenever possible. We also found cases where a question contains more
than a functional requirement. This way, we count the number of functional requirements independently of the number
of questions. Section 4.3 answers RQ1(d).
3.3

Characterizing the Challenges

We use the same randomly sampled question set used above to analyze specific issues that developers report and
characterize the challenges of managing events in microservice architectures.
Again, the first two authors adopt an open coding procedure and analyze all the elements of each question, including
comments from users other than the author’s question, to carefully extract insights about practitioners’ challenges. The
detailed procedure is as follows.
First, we ensured the practitioner’s requirements were properly clarified. The reasoning is that we noticed the
user often reports a problem faced subsequent to or in the context of expressing the non-functional and functional
requirements sought. Since we already had the questions labeled with requirements through the previous methodology
steps, our primary task remained to understand the challenges from the problem description and other question
elements.
In many cases, the challenges could be identified by questions raised in the form of "how" or "what," as in other
studies [121]. For example, one user asked [66]: "How can I process the event with the user credentials?" ; and another
user inquired [116]: "What’s maybe not a good idea in trying to recover the current state of your domain model by
replaying an arbitrary set of your events ."
We also observed, though, in other cases, the users would not raise a question, but rather:
(a) express the willingness to achieve certain functionality [74]: "I want to create a third microservice that is responsible
to join the data of ProductService and StoreService."
(b) describe the possible cause of a problem [51]: "In my system two different sources can cause creating specific type of
event. [...] due to replication lag"
(c) inform a desired correctness criteria not being met [88]: "The end price should be 100 for that product, but sometimes
these events are processed in random order."
Manuscript submitted to ACM

10

Laigner et al.
In a few cases, the question’s body lacks detailed information about the user’s application scenario. In those cases,

we searched for additional comments from the author’s post made as a response to questions raised by other SO users.
In the absence of further details about the user’s problem scenario, the authors made the best effort to characterize the
reported issue, jointly discussing whenever a disagreement was in place.
Second, once the problem statement was clarified, the authors started grouping similar problems into categories. The
authors jointly iterated multiple times over the questions and categories. Whenever conflicts were observed in grouping
the questions, a third arbitrator was introduced to discuss and reach a consensus. The third arbitrator has more than
fifteen years of experience in cloud computing and data engineering. Lately, all questions come to an agreement and
the final categories (i.e., the challenges) are confirmed by all the participants. Section 5 answers RQ2(a).
4

STATE OF THE PRACTICE (RQ1)

In this section, we describe the state of practice based on the discussions found in SO.
4.1

Patterns Trend

Table 2 exhibits the most recurrent patterns that appear in questions related to event management in microservices
architectures 5 . In the top ten most mentioned patterns, four are directly related to event management (messaging, event
sourcing, domain event, cqrs), one related to synchronous communication (RPC), two related to deployment patterns
(database per service and service-per-container), and three related to typical microservice architectural patterns (API
gateway, service registry, and aggregate).
We can observe that although event management patterns dominate the list, patterns unrelated to event management
also appear substantially. For instance, remote procedure invocation, a synchronous communication technology,
appears as the second most cited pattern. As events are processed asynchronously, the employment of synchronous
communication mechanisms contrasts with the pursued benefits of events, which are often related to more efficient
usage of computational resources and decoupling [39, 56, 58]. This trend is mainly due to the need for developers to
reply to users the result of asynchronous computations, as exemplified in a developer’s quote below:
“How is it possible to send the results stored in the kafka topic back to the requesting WebClient_X?”
These challenges are further discussed in Section 5.1. Popular microservice patterns appearance in the top 10, namely,
API gateway and service registry, can be justified by the need to allow web clients to initiate asynchronous computations
and expose certain APIs to the external world, and to allow for service discovery , respectively. It is worth noting these
are not concerns event management tackles in an event-driven architecture.
We also observed that the patterns Database per Service and Service-per-Container are often used synonymously by
developers. The popularity of these two database deployment patterns suggests developers tend to avoid deployments
that prescribe two or more microservices sharing the same database. For instance, the messaging pattern is only
mentioned together with Shared Database is 12 occasions. We further discuss this trend in Section 4.2.
Highlight: Adopting a shared database pattern would jeopardize the benefits of decoupling through events. The
microservices would compete for computational resources of the machine (or container) hosting the database
server, leading to decreased performance effects.

5 For improved presentation, we show only those patterns appearing in 20 or more questions.

Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

11

To aid our analysis, we grouped the patterns into pairs and count the number of times they are cited together in
questions, as exhibited in Table 3. In general, the pairs’ appearance is aligned with the individual numbers of Table 2.
Event management patterns, such as messaging, event sourcing, CQRS, and domain event, appear substantially is pairs
followed by Remote Procedure Invocation and Database Per Service. Other interesting insights are also confirmed, like the
popularity of an authentication mechanism together with service discovery. Furthermore, the combination of pairs
sheds light on the most common set of patterns considered in questions involving event management in microservices.
Messaging, event sourcing, Database per Service, CQRS, Service Registry, and Third Party Registration are substantially
mentioned in conjunction in questions, suggesting a pattern adoption trend.
To further aid our analysis, we grouped correlated patterns into categories shown in Figure 2. Patterns associated with
data management form the most prominent category, followed by communication patterns, application architecture,
support-service, deployment, security, and observability. We observe three subgroups within data management, including
patterns associated with data consistency enforcement, database deployment, and data querying. Interestingly, in
data consistency, we observe not only event-related patterns, such as domain event and event sourcing, but also SAGA
and eventual consistency. That suggests developers also look for event management as an alternative to traditional,
synchronous-based mechanisms for implementing consistency patterns, confirming the preliminary findings of [59].
Highlight: Asynchronous events can enhance the performance of data consistency patterns by allowing for
non-blocking interactions across microservices. That can lead to higher performance.
In the application architecture realm, event-driven architecture (EDA) is substantially mentioned, an expected trend
given the scope of the study. However, Domain-Driven Design (DDD) also appears to a lesser extent. We found that
only twelve questions mention EDA and DDD in conjunction, suggesting these two patterns are not popularly adopted
together when it comes to event management in microservices.
Highlight: As EDA often prescribes events trigger specific functions [39], our analysis suggests that this direct
mapping between an event type and an application function (aka business logic) demotivates the modeling of
extra modularity layers as prescribed by DDD.
We also observe the representativeness of patterns associated with deployment, such as sidecar and service-percontainer, security with access token, and observability with log aggregation. The categories and related patterns exhibited
in Figure 2 form the bulk of patterns cited by microservice developers. We explore further these phenomena in Section 5.
Finding 1: There is a specific subset of patterns that appear frequently in event management questions. These
mainly relate to database resource isolation, data consistency, and asynchronous messaging. Questions involving
event management are also accompanied by mentions of patterns not directly related to event management,
suggesting users often attempt to blend heterogeneous patterns in their deployments to solve cross-cutting
concerns such as observability and security.

4.2

Non-Functional Requirements

Table 4 exhibits the extracted non-functional requirements from SO. We discuss the results along with key correlations
found among NFRs as follows.
Consistency and Decoupling. Consistency appears to be the most cited NFR in event management questions in sync
with the microservice patterns collected in the last section. A popular concern we noticed in this regard is the unmet
Manuscript submitted to ACM

12

Laigner et al.
Table 2. Relevant patterns extracted from Stack Overflow

Pattern

# Posts

Pattern

# Posts

Messaging
Remote Procedure Invocation
Event Sourcing
Database per Service
API Gateway
Domain Event
Service Registry
Command Query Responsibility Segregation (CQRS)
Aggregate
Service-per-Container
Access Token
Eventual Consistency
Event-driven Architecture
Saga
Domain Driven Design (DDD)
Service Template
3rd Party Registration
Log Aggregation
Sidecar

1056
624
537
424
249
225
221
219
207
192
174
171
151
141
138
97
96
54
53

Shared Database
Circuit Breaker
Transactional Outbox
Domain-specific
Single Service per Host
Service-per-VM
CDC
Backend for frontend
Service per Team
Application Metrics
Health Check API
Externalized Configuration
Polling Publisher
Distributed Tracing
Self-contained Service
Audit Logging
Transaction Log Tailing
Multiple Service per Host

50
48
43
42
39
38
38
32
32
25
25
24
23
23
23
20
20
20

Fig. 2. Most popular patterns in event management in microservices

expectation of certain events to arrive. For instance, one developer mentions a consistency problem observed whenever
the delivery of events lags behind [16]:
"When an event isn’t received in the worker, the counters start to "drift away" from the true MySQL
count.[...]"
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

13

Table 3. Relevant pairs of patterns mentioned in event management extracted from Stack Overflow

Pair of Patterns

# of Posts

Pair of Patterns

# of Posts

Remote Procedure Invocation & Messaging
Messaging & Event Sourcing
Remote Procedure Invocation & Event Sourcing
Messaging & Database per Service
Remote Procedure Invocation & Database per Service
Event Sourcing & Database per Service
Event Sourcing & CQRS
Service Registry & Messaging
Service Registry & 3rd Party Registration
Event Sourcing & Domain Event
Messaging & API Gateway
Remote Procedure Invocation & API Gateway
Event Sourcing & Aggregate
Messaging & Domain Event
Database per Service & CQRS
Service-per-Container & Messaging
Messaging & Event-driven Architecture

278
202
145
132
125
124
122
114
90
85
84
81
81
81
72
72
71

Service Registry & Remote Procedure Invocation
Messaging & CQRS
Service-per-Container & Remote Procedure Invocation
Messaging & Aggregate
Remote Procedure Invocation & Domain Event
Messaging & Eventual Consistency
SAGA & Messaging
Domain Event & CQRS
Messaging & Access Token
Domain Event & DDD
Remote Procedure Invocation & Event-driven Architecture
CQRS & Aggregate
Event Sourcing & API Gateway
Eventual Consistency & Event Sourcing
Service Template & Remote Procedure Invocation
Remote Procedure Invocation & CQRS

69
68
67
67
67
64
60
58
57
56
53
51
51
50
50
50

Table 4. Relevant Non-Functional requirements extracted from Stack Overflow

Non-Functional Requirement

# of Posts

Consistency
Decoupling
Scalability
Performance
Modularity
Traceability
Security
Fault Tolerance
Load Balancing

312
303
249
194
170
164
154
138
109

Table 5. Relevant Non-Functional Requirement pairs extracted from Stack Overflow

Pair of NFR
Performance (24.23%) & Scalability (18.87%)
Decoupling (15.51%) & Scalability (18.87%)
Consistency (14.42%) & Decoupling (14.85%)
Consistency (12.5%) & Scalability (15.66%)

# of Questions
47
47
45
39

We observe that most developers express awareness that there is a natural delay to be expected. In a few cases, though,
concerns over "how up to date" a given microservice is are implicitly raised, as exemplified by the same developer, as
follows:
Manuscript submitted to ACM

14

Laigner et al.
It is expected that there is a consistency delay for this type of data. How up-to-date the data is can
even be figured out and included in the responses for stats data.

We further discuss the tension between the eventual delivery of events and application correctness in Section 5.
Furthermore, we found that decoupling is the NFR most correlated with consistency. Analyzing the posts in which
consistency and decoupling are mentioned together (45 posts), we observed that developers often identify trade-offs in
pursuing the two NFRs in conjunction. The following extracted SO thread exemplifies this trend. A developer presents
its application requirements starting with decoupling concerns [33]:
While each microservice generally will have its own data - certain entities are required to be consistent
across multiple services.
I do not want shared database architecture, where a single DB manages the state across all the services.
That violates isolation and shared-nothing principles.
And then highlights a possible mechanism to ensure cross-microservice consistency [33]:
"I do understand that, a microservice can publish an event when an entity is created, updated or deleted.
All other microservices which are interested in this event can accordingly update the linked entities in
their respective databases."
However, the developer realizes some inner drawbacks [33]:
"however it leads to a lot of careful and coordinated programming effort across the services. Can
Akka or any other framework solve this use case? How?"
Another developer responds the thread acknowledging the tension between decoupling and consistency and the lack
of principled solutions to the problem [12]:
I think there are 2 main forces at play here:
decoupling - that’s why you have microservices in the first place and want a shared-nothing approach to
data persistence
consistency - if I understood correctly you’re already fine with eventual consistency
I don’t know of any framework to do it out of the box, probably due to the many use-case specific
trade-offs involved.
Performance and Scalability. Consistency and decoupling NFRs lead the number of post appearances in SO. However,
taken together, they are outperformed by the pair performance and scalability. We observe developers express concerns
on varied performance topics. For instance, both developers below face a problem when the event processing rate
exacerbates the processing capacity of consumer microservices. We delve into performance issues on managing events
in Section 5.3.
(DEV#1) Service A listens to a rabbit queue and sends http request to service B (which takes a couple of
seconds). Both services scale based on the number of message in the queue. The problem is that the requests
from A to B are not balanced. [...] That obviously causes low performance and timeouts. [61]
(DEV#2) My problem is the queue. I can’t get an easily scalable queue that guarantees ordering of
the messages. It actually guarantees "slightly out of order" with at-least once delivery [...] [21]
The same developer continues then:
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

15

"But it turns out that using this solution, it will destroy performance when events are produced at high
rates (I can use a visibility timeout or other stuff, the result should be the same)."
Fault tolerance. We also observe developers consider the adoption of event management technologies as a mechanism
to increase fault tolerance in their microservice architectures. In the example below [100], a developer inquiries other
users about whether Kafka can provide appropriate fault-tolerance support. We discuss about failures and their possible
impact on microservices in Section 5.1.
"I am working in a project that starts creating independent deployable services. The service we are
creating should be resilient with an 24/7 uptime."
"In this case Kafka will be used as an event system. What do you think about the requirements and the
usage of Kafka to get a highly available and resilient application?"
Finding 2: Consistency, decoupling, and performance appear as the most mentioned non-functional requirements. However, developers suggest there are trade-offs on properly meeting them in event-driven microservice
architectures.
4.3

Functional Requirements

In this section, we discuss the most recurrent functional requirements sought by microservice developers on which
event management is applied (denoted by FR[0-N]). Table 6 summarizes the number of functional requirements per
question.
FR1. Propagation of state updates. We observe
that the majority of questions contains a requirement

Table 6. Relevant Functional Requirements extracted from Stack Over-

related to propagating state updates in form of events. flow
A developer summarizes this practice as follows [33]:
"A microservice can publish an event
when an entity is created, updated or
deleted. All other microservices which
are interested in this event can accordingly update the linked entities in
their respective databases."
Here we only take into account the questions where
the developers’ intention of propagating the events
are either not expressed or not clear from the dis-

Functional Requirement

# of Questions

FR1. Propagation of state updates

78

FR2. Multi-microservice workflows

66

FR3. Data Integrity Maintenance

33

FR4. Replaying of events

22

FR5. Query Processing

20

FR6. Data replication

17

FR7. Cache management

12

FR8. Task Scheduling

5

cussions. However, it is natural to deduce these state
updates in form of events are used by other microservices to achieve other requirements, as we discuss next.
FR2. Multi-microservice workflows. We also observe a substantial number of developers reporting use cases where
a business transaction require a composition of microservices [93] via events.
For instance, question 42140285 exhibits that an event generated by a microservice triggers an operation in another
microservice [27]:
"Order [microservice] receives an order request. It has to store the new Order ([record]) in its database
and publish a message so that Payment service realizes it has to charge for the item"
Manuscript submitted to ACM

16

Laigner et al.
Differently from the previous scenario though, we observe developers in this case have the expectation about the

completion of the triggered computations.
In sum, in this functional requirement, the generation of an event act as a command, a call for action, for downstream
microservices, manifesting the need to perform operations, often involving the operations in their private states.
FR3. Data Integrity Maintenance.
We also found questions that developers highlight how an event is used to maintain the integrity of a microservice’s
state. An example is provided as follows [112].
"I have a web-api-endpoint that receives orders that an OrderMS is responsible to handle. When order is
put[,] Inventory must be updated so OrderMS publish an event to subscribers [...] and InventoryMS will
update the inventory due to it is subscribing to current event/message"
Another developer explains the intention to achieve functional dependency across microservices via events propagated [122]:
"Customer and Order microservice both have customer details, though in Order microservice customer
infos are striped to only required fields. I understand there is a way to maintain consistency of data across
microservices using events."
FR4. Replaying of events. We observe that developers seek replaying (i.e., resending) past application-generated
events in two cases:
(i) Synchronizing states. Microservice applications evolve over time. As new microservices are incorporated into the
topology, it may be the case that these are required to synchronize with the current application state, as described by a
developer [117]:
"When I add new service to a set of already running services, I need upstream dependencies to send
all the messages from the past to the new service so it could align its state with the one of the whole
system."
(ii) Troubleshooting and Auditing. As the communication abstraction in event-driven microservices, it is natural that
the re-execution of the event flow may assist in further understanding the application behavior, as explained by the
following developers:
(DEV #1) I want to replay events on an invoice where the I want to see all actions done by a specific
employee on the balance. [82]
(DEV #2) The intent for this pattern [(event sourcing)] is to provide an audit trail of all events that took
place while the patient was in the hospital. [107]
FR5. Query processing. Developers tend to report the implementation of query processing operators at the application
level. In this case, they implement queries that operate over the payload of subscribed events, as exemplified by the
following SO question [74]:
"I want to create a third microservice that is responsible to join the data of ProductService and
StoreService in order to retrieve all the available products. Here, CQRS pattern seems like the best
solution: I will create a materialized view and I will synchronize it using domains events published by the
other 2 microservices."
FR6. Data replication. We observe that the propagation of state updates is also an enabler of data replication. By
subscribing to state updates in the form of events, consumers can maintain their own view of the state managed by
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

17

other microservices without requiring to pull updates, thus avoiding the overhead entailed by synchronous calls (e.g.,
RPCs) [115].
For instance, in the following question [55], the developer explains that
"Service A could raise an event whenever a new student is registering. Service B will consume the event
and stores student info in its [own] db."
Based on our analysis, it is worth noting that not all cases of propagation of state updates will decidedly lead to data
replication, but all cases of data replication via events necessarily require propagation of state updates.
FR7. Cache management. In a similar way to FR6, another reported scenario lies on maintaining caches based on
subscribed events, as explained by a developer as follows [109].
"When C starts up it needs to load all of the current data from P into its cache, and then subscribe to
change notifications. (In other words, we want to synchronize data between the services.)"
FR8. Task Scheduling. We also found cases about events being used as abstractions to manage the life cycle of
long-running jobs. As example scenarios, we highlight the following:
"That job info is placed in a RabbitMQ message and sent off by the RabbitMQ Producer [..] A RabbitMQ
Consumer receives message with the job info and calls the class that is responsible for Executing the long
running job, the job status is updated to IN-PROGRESS" [79]
"The idea is to have the REST API immediately post a message to a queue, with a background worker
role picking up the message from the queue and spinning up multiple backend tasks, also using
queues. REST API [..] generates a GUID and attach that as an attribute on the message being added to the
queue" [111]
Finding 3: Event management is applied to fulfill varied functional requirements, such as communicating
data updates, composing microservices functionalities, and processing queries, indicating the heterogeneous
applicability of events.
5

EVENT MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES (RQ2)

Having discussed the state of practice of event management, we focus on the challenges developers face when managing
events in their microservice deployments. Figure 3 summarizes the challenges we extracted from SO. The leaf nodes
represent the specific challenges, whereas their parent nodes represent the categories to which a challenge belongs. For
example, the Performance (5.3) category comprises three specific challenges: event processing overhead (CP1), large
event payload (CP2), and fluctuating event rate (CP3). In total, our analysis led to five categories and sixteen specific
challenges, indicating the heterogeneity of the problems microservice developers encounter when managing events.
Next, we discuss and exemplify each specific challenge by their categories. Along the discussion, it is worth noting that
we refer to messaging technology as any system that enables microservices to exchange events through publishing and
subscription mechanisms.
5.1

Safety and Liveness

Safety and liveness are properties inherent to distributed systems [60]. While safety properties prescribe that nothing bad
happens, liveness properties prescribe that something good eventually happens. For instance, a traditional example of
safety property is found in the 2-Phase Commit (2PC) protocol [69]. In 2PC, the effects of the operations of a transaction
Manuscript submitted to ACM

18

Laigner et al.

Fig. 3. Overview of challenges in managing events in microservice architectures

that cuts across nodes are only made available to subsequent transactions if all participating nodes agree. A common
liveness guarantee example is eventual consistency [83]. In this consistency model, nodes eventually converge to the
same outcomes (e.g., data item versions). When this is achieved, it is often unbounded, making it a weak consistency
model.
In this section, we use these two properties to discuss related problems in the context of event management in
microservice architectures. We reveal microservice practitioners’ expectations when managing events, particularly
when publishing, consuming, processing, reverting the effects of, and replaying events.
5.1.1

Publishing events safely (CAS1). Safety.

The functional requirements investigated in Section 4.2 highlight that generating events is the cornerstone of
event-based microservice architectures. Events are often raised in response to local operations, typifying a causality
relation. Therefore, failures in local operations must automatically withdraw the existence of a resulting event. However,
we find that event’s publishing semantics are not always crystal clear for microservice developers. We highlight as
follows the most common types of issues using developers’ own quotes:
(i) Developers seek to acknowledge whether the event published has reached out to the message broker, for instance [27]:
(DEV#1) "This operation [(publishing the event)] is asynchronous and ALWAYS returns true, no matter
if the broker is down. How can I know that the message has reached the broker?"
(ii) Developers wonder whether publishing an event as part of a transaction is possible, for instance [81]:
(DEV#2) "[...] does actually spring-kafka support JTA transactions and would it be enough to wrap RDBMS
and Kafka Producer into @Transactional [(ORM annotation)] methods?"
(iii) In other cases, developers wonder how to ensure atomicity semantics when publishing more than an event as
part of an operation, like the user below [64]:
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

19

(DEV#3) "Let’s say a command needs to append an event to both, the public and private user stream.
How can you make sure that both events have been appended? Does the event store publish both,
SomeUserEventHapppendPrivate and SomeUsererEventHappendPublic, to the event bus?"
(iv) Developers look for alternative ways to publish events out of the critical path of the application, such as
asynchronously detecting database updates and publishing these as events, like the case below [94]:
(DEV#4) "Should I have some kind of background timed process which will scan events table and
publish events to SQS? Can this be process within WebApi application (preferable), or should this be a
separate a process?"
Challenges related to ensuring events are correctly published appear in 13.79% of Safety&Liveness challenges and
reflect 8.60% of the total, indicating the representativeness of the problem.
Discussion: We observe practitioners seem unfamiliar with the guarantees provided by messaging technologies. As a
result, they may fail to foresee the possible issues associated with ensuring consistency between two systems, in their
case, the (producer) microservice and the message broker.
Recent Change-Data-Capture (CDC) tools like Debezium 6 soften this challenge by dedicating a system to capture
updates in a microservice private state (e.g., relational tables), offloading developers from explicitly handling the
publishing of events. Each update is then eventually delivered to consumer microservices. However, apart of the need to
manage an additional system, when or whether this delivery is performed is unknown, which can lead to an additional
challenge as we see in Section 5.1.7.
Furthermore, some database systems like Oracle 7 and PostgreSQL 8 , offer mechanisms to publish events atomically as
part of transactions. However, the benefits of state encapsulation would be jeopardized given all consumer microservices
would depend on specific producer-managed databases, thus leaking the private microservice state abstraction.
5.1.2

Roll-backing states (CAS2). Safety.

Once an application-generated event is published (i.e., reach out to the message broker successfully), the event
becomes available for consumption by other microservices, which in turn can consume and start processing the event.
However, events may be consumed and processed by multiple microservices independently, which makes it challenging
to track down the possible errors across multiple microservices and react accordingly. As a result, we observe that
developers express uncertainties on how to appropriately deal with failures, such as the following cases:
(DEV #1) "[...] the state modification is actually a complex operation across multiple microservices using
the saga pattern, which needs to be rolled back if something fails. [...] How to cleanup the state if the
service modified it, but failed in the end, e.g. due to system shutdown?" [91]
(DEV #2) "When my Transaction is committed, normally I will dispatch IntegrationEvent (e.g. to the
queue), but there is possibility that this queue is down as well, so previously just-committed transaction
has to be "reverted". How?" [85]
In this sense, many answers received for related questions suggest the use of compensating actions triggered via
additional events; however, some developers acknowledge that these inherit the same properties of the originating
problem, as summarized by the following quote:
6 https://debezium.io
7 https://www.oracle.com
8 https://www.postgresql.org

Manuscript submitted to ACM

20

Laigner et al.
(DEV#3) "If 3.a ([an operation triggered via event]) fails[,] a compensation action is performed; but
what about if it fails?" [52]
We observe this challenge is significant in the context of Safety&Liveness challenges (13.22%), spanning across

8.24% of the total questions.
Discussion: When the event is published, the event producer loses control over downstream processing due to the
independent failure of microservices. Similarly, consumers are unaware of which microservice produced the event stream
to which they are subscribed. In this case, we found some developers design specific event streams to communicate
failures in the workflow, as we discuss in Section 5.1.2.
However, publishing events that semantically represent the occurrence of a failure can also fail. That can lead "dirty"
intermediate states (i.e., the effects of canceled operations) to remain exposed indefinitely. On the other hand, even
though upstream microservices acknowledge a downstream failure, once the local operations are committed as part of
a transaction in the database, it is often not possible to rollback the transaction. Thus, upon failure, it is unclear for
developers how to properly revert those changes.
5.1.3

Processing event dependencies (CAS3). Liveness.

Events often carry a schema, or an event type, and are published in a stream (aka topic or queue) on which all events
published must adhere to such schema. We observe an interesting trend in which practitioners attempt to match distinct
but correlated events at event processing time. The trend is exemplified by a developer [43]:
(DEV#1) It is very straightforward to implement a [(event)] listener when an action depends on one
single event ([stream]). [...] The problem arises when OrderService has to wait for more than one
event [(from different streams)]
The developer contextualizes the case and expresses the problem then [43]:
(DEV#1) I am pooling both queues
CREDIT_AVAILABLE_QUEUE and
INVENTORY_AVAILABLE_QUEUE, and both events has to be present so I can finish an order. How can I
coordinate so that OrderService sees both events as only one?
However, these dependencies across distinct events may require ordering guarantees from the messaging technology,
which may not be present, as noted by another developer [21]:
(DEV#2) If UserCreated comes after
ProductAddedToCart the normal flow requires to throw an exception because the user doesn’t exist
yet. [...] So, the ordering problems are:
No order guaranteed across events from the same event stream.
No order guaranteed across events from the same ES [(event store)].
No order guaranteed across events from different ES (different services).
These ordering problem can ultimately lead to concurrency bugs in the application code, as noted by the former
developer [43]:
(DEV#1) There is a minimal chance of receiving both events at the same time[,] generating race conditions.
We observe that this challenge appears substantially, spanning across 20.11& of Safety&Liveness challenges.
Besides, it spans 12.54% of the total questions, highlighting the practical significance of this event processing pattern.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

21

Discussion: Developers express some events are semantically related and thus cannot be processed independently.
However, developers fall prey to weak ordering semantics across event streams. Another challenging factor is that
the delivery of events can experience arbitrary delays due to network partitions, overload of computational resources,
network jitter, and even the failure of producer microservices. These aspects together pose a challenge in enforcing
event dependencies across distinct event streams.
This event processing characteristic may find resemblance with the so-called workflow patterns, posited for business
processes and web service compositions [50] a few decades ago. Recent microservice frameworks, like Dapr 9 , has
included in their API support for some workflow patterns, such as fan-out/fan-in [30]. However, workflow patterns
often require either a domain-specific language or a common framework where all microservices are implemented
with, as well as the explicit specification of workflows, including event producers and consumers. These contrasts with
the polyglot nature of microservices and the decoupling through events seek by microservice developers. Thus, it is an
open question whether and how workflow patterns can mitigate the challenges of processing event dependencies.
5.1.4

Processing events in order (CAS4). Safety.

While analyzing the questions, we noticed that practitioners often expect events to be processed in order for every
consumer. However, in many cases, this expectation is not met. Unlike the previous challenge, this challenge affects
single event streams (i.e., all conforming to the same event type) rather than distinct events. A developer exemplifies
the problem as follows.
(DEV#1) Suppose a product is ordered and it is id 80, and a series of sequential update events fired from
product service to order services for that particular product [...] The end price should be 100 for that
product, but sometimes these events are processed in random order [88]
The developer expects that the product price observed by the Order microservice must eventually be in sync with the
product’s state in the producer (i.e., Product microservice). Therefore, any processing order not leading to a price of 100
as the final state is deemed incorrect. In some cases, practitioners acknowledge that an in-order processing guarantee
cannot be enforced in consumers due to the uncertain semantics of producers:
(DEV#2) Since each microservice has its own event table and asynchronous worker, we cannot guarantee
that events will be sent in the sequence in which the corresponding state changes occurred in their
respective microservices. [77]
This challenges appears in 16.67% of Safety&Liveness challenges and accounts for 10.39% of the total challenges
observed, highlighting the difficulty of ensuring events are processed in the expected order.
Discussion: Although the majority of messaging systems guarantee the delivery of events from the same stream in
order, such as Kafka through the concept of a topic partition [10], that does not exclude producers and consumers
from still processing the events accounting for the expected processing order semantic. For example, for producers
consisting of concurrent threads writing to the same partition, even though Kafka serializes the messages, the correct
order that the consumer must process the messages is not well defined. Similarly, suppose multiple consumer threads
pull messages concurrently from Kafka. In that case, if the order of messages across different pulls matters, it is complex
and error-prone for general developers to reassemble the original stream order at the consumer side.

9 https://docs.dapr.io

Manuscript submitted to ACM

22

Laigner et al.
In most questions analyzed with this particular challenge, we could not identify whether the message broker delivers

the messages out of order or the microservice processes the event arbitrarily (not accounting for the delivery order). As
the quote below exemplifies [80], event processing semantics appear unclear to some microservice developers.
(DEV#3) In [(omitted technology,)] messages are best-effort ordering, still no idea of what they
mean. [...] Does it means that[,] giving n copies of a message[,] the first copy is delivered in order[,] while
the others are delivered unordered compared to the other messages’ copies? Or "more that one" could be
"all"?
5.1.5

Synchronizing states via event replay (CAS5). Safety.

As described in Section 4.2, the need for replaying events often arises due to new microservices being introduced in
the system. In this context, a developer explains an interesting challenge [84]:
(DEV#1) Service "A" creates event message to inform other services about changes [...] Newly introduced
Service "D" also needs to replicate data coming from service "A". Service "D" needs all historic data[.]
The developer then continues expressing the impedance found.
([...]) other services were already running for a while, and service "A" only broadcasts new changes.
What would be the correct solution to populate newly added service with historic data?
Furthermore, as microservices supposedly fail independently, it may be necessary to replay events from the point in
time the subscriber microservice(s) failed, as described by another developer [3]:
(DEV#2) I’m wondering what should happen if one of these events can not be delivered due to an error
[...] On republishing events, should all messages be republished to all topics or would it be possible to
only republish a subset?
Challenges involving replaying events also appear significantly in Safety&Liveness challenges (14.37%), accounting
for 8.96% of the total challenges, suggesting mechanisms for safely replaying events are strongly seek by developers but
missing in practice.
Discussion: Along the analysis, we find that the need for replaying events arises not only from software evolution,
including adding new microservices and migrating to a microservice architecture but also when recovering from failures
and fixing the outcome of bugs. However, developers express uncertainties about how to proceed properly in the cases
above and end up implementing several ad-hoc mechanisms at the application layer to fulfill these. As a result, these
mechanisms often result in rework and create additional issues in the application.
5.1.6

Continuous queries over events (CAS6). Liveness.

We observe that practitioners commonly carry out continuous queries consisting of various query operators (e.g.,
filter, join, and aggregations) [126] over the payload of incoming events to extract valuable information. However, the
nondeterminism of asynchronous events (i.e., the arrival of events may experience large delays or even never arrive)
poses challenges in ensuring correct query processing results, as described by a developer [74]:
(DEV#1) When I update a Product entity or Store entity there is no problem to sync the view because I
already have data on it. But what about when I receive a ProductCreated event?
This event has only information about product and nothing else, so stock, store_name, store_address
will be NULL.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

23

How can I save this event in my view? Should I save incomplete data somewhere else and update my
view when I will receive complete data?
Furthermore, as software evolves over time, changing requirements can also undermine providing correct query
results based on events, as exposed by another developer [49]:
(DEV#2) I have new requirement - calculating maximum all time temperature per sensor.
I have prepared new microservice that creates KTable ([Kafka table abstraction]) aggregating temperature (with max) grouped per sensor.
Simply deploying this microservice would be enough if input topic had infinite retention, but now
maximum would be not all-time, as is our requirement. [...] How to design the solution? (67074772)
The impediment found above relates to the inner characteristic of stream processing engines, that necessarily rely on
windows and notions of time to avoid querying all the historical data in order to provide fast responses [48]. Continuous
queries over events appear frequently in Safety&Liveness challenges (12.07%) and corresponds to 7.53% of the total
questions, highlighting the significance of this challenge.
Discussion: For over two decades, continuous queries and stream processing systems have been a mainstream research
topic in the data management community [40], resulting in industry-strength solutions like Flink 10 and Kafka Streams 11 .
These systems allow users to declare a query that is continuously updated based on incoming streams. However, we
notice microservice developers often do not mention stream processing systems and prefer patterns like CQRS, not
realizing that providing correct query results with this pattern incurs additional challenges. Besides implementing the
query operators, developers must ensure that duplicate events (we further discuss in Section 5.1.7), crashes, and delays
do not impact the query results.
Stream processing systems are designed to handle the gamut of problems that arise in maintaining continuous
queries. We conjecture microservice developers are either unaware of or may find difficult to map their application
logic to stream processing operators.
5.1.7

Weak delivery semantics (CAS7). Liveness.

Messaging technologies often guarantee at-least-once delivery by default, leaving the responsibility of achieving
at-most-once or exactly-once delivery semantics to application developers [40]. However, by resorting to at-least-once
delivery semantics, developers can face unpredictable challenges, as exemplified by the developer as follows [53]:
(DEV#1) I was able to collect the data [(published as events)] from another microservice, but I noticed
that if I terminate the [(consumer)] process and run it again, I get the data back, PLUS another copy of the
same data right under it. [...] I got the payload sent to me twice, and I only want to see it once.
As the developer’s quote shows, a problematic aspect of at-least-once delivery is that events can be delivered more
than once. That forces consumers to either make their microservices idempotent or fall prey to the undesired effects of
duplicate event processing. The following microservice developer expresses another interesting case [29]:
(DEV#2) The only way I have to know that the payment has been processed by Payment service is by
expecting an answer event (Payment ok|failure).
However, in the absence of an event that confirms that a payment has been processed, the developer comes up with
its own customized solution:
10 https://flink.apache.org
11 https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/streams

Manuscript submitted to ACM

24

Laigner et al.
If it hasn’t gotten an answer in some time, [that] forces me to implement a retry mechanism in the
Order server, [that is,] retry with a new Payment event.
The developer ended up dealing with an unexpected outcome:
˙
[However,]
this also forces me to take care of duplicated messages in Payment service in case they
were actually processed but the answer didn’t get to the Order service.
Another popular issue on resorting to events for asynchronous processing lies on the fact that computations are often

initiated based on client requests. These online requests require timely response to users and challenges developers to
match the eventual arrival of asynchronous events (i.e., the response of the client-triggered asynchronous computation)
with the corresponding waiting client. A developer describes the problem below [6]:
After publishing the event[,] my booking service can’t block the call and goes back to the client
(front end).
How does my client app will have to check the status of transaction? Does it poll every couple of seconds?
Since this is distributed transaction and any service can go down and won’t be able to acknowledge
back.
In that case how do my client (front end) would know since it will keep on waiting.
Dealing with weak delivery semantics is the most popular challenge in Safety&Liveness category (27.59%). By
appearing in 17.20% of total the questions, that evidences the difficulty of managing events under weak delivery
semantics.
Discussion: The loss of events may be caused by many issues. Besides consumers crashing, during a rebalance in Kafka
brokers, consumers can experience delays in event delivery [37]. Besides, the network can become unstable, leading to
delays in network package deliveries. In an attempt to ensure the completeness of operations across microservices,
developers often rely on custom-made, ad-hoc solutions, such as the retry mechanism shown above. However, retries
can lead to the additional burden of dealing with duplicate events, which forces developers to implement additional
mechanisms at the application layer to impede duplicate events from being processed, only exacerbating the problem.
Finding 4: Developers encounter a myriad of challenges on ensuring events are processed correctly. These span
the entire life-cycle of an event in a microservice architecture, including queuing, delivering, storing, processing,
and synchronizing events.
5.1.8 Implications. Given the wide range of safety and liveness challenges, we discuss the implications in two groups.
The first covers event publishing and delivery semantics and the second relates to the challenges of synchronizing
microservices’ events.
CAS 1, 2, 4, and 7. Developers lack a comprehensive specification to guide them with the variety of event processing
semantics and in dealing with failures in asynchronous, distributed microservices, suggesting they are in need for
supporting tools. For messaging technology providers and framework developers, their documentation can emphasize
the publishing and delivery semantics offered more clearly, including, but not limited to, the possible failure scenario
microservice developers must consider and example workarounds to mitigate some of their effects in the microservice
state. In addition, these should be provided in a language suitable for developers who are not familiar with distributed
and asynchronous systems.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

25

For database providers, explicit APIs for rolling back microservices’ underlying databases to a state prior to processing
a given event can help alleviate the burden of dealing with online failures in event-based workflows. Researchers can
systematically characterize the guarantees provided by popular messaging technologies and enhance code analysis
tools to better alert developers about potential hidden shortcomings of the different guarantees.
CAS 3, 5, and 6. The need to process and match distinct event streams generated by different producer microservices
spans different functional requirements, such as replicating data, processing distinct but correlated events, and maintaining queries over event streams. Together, they form 26.83% of the total challenges, highlighting the practical significance
of these event processing patterns. To fulfill these, developers often hold the assumption that events will arrive in a
timely and exactly once manner. However, events may either take arbitrary time to arrive or never arrive. Besides,
even if events arrive, they may be repeated. The mismatch between expectations and reality leads to frustrations in
implementing the requirements above. Thus, microservice developers must be vigilant with designs that favor the
existence of such event processing patterns. Rethinking service boundaries [1] may lead to some of the events involved
in intricate event processing patterns being merged or eliminated.
Providers of messaging technologies and cloud computing services, and framework developers can offer further
guidance at the documentation and API levels to alert developers regarding the potential dangers of some event
processing patterns. Potentially, message technologies can devise better APIs to support developers making sure event
dependencies are met. For example, an API to wait for multiple dependant events instead of individual events.
Researchers can improve static and dynamic analysis tools to detect certain code properties and execution traces that
may lead to the harmful scenarios discussed. Another direction could be developing automatic tools to enforce safety
properties on event processing. For example, Lesniak et al. [62] extend message queuing system with a programmable
interface where developers can specify event processing order which will be enforced automatically.
All CAS. Researchers can devise or extend existing programming models to account for use cases that necessitate
correlation between distinct event streams and abstract publishing and delivery semantics from the microservice code.
For instance, they can take inspiration from the dataflow model [2], commonly used in stream processing engines, to
accommodate the missing dynamic topology, non-blocking, isolated failure model found in real-world microservices.
That can simplify the programmability of microservices and favor the adoption of tricky event stream processing patterns.
Additionally, this programming model can unify the design and deployment of event-based microservices across cloud
providers and execution platforms to facilitate the migration and hybrid execution of microservice applications across
message technology providers, an emerging trend in cloud computing [25].

5.2

Event Schema Management

Microservice practitioners model events for external interaction. In other words, the decoupling nature of a microservice
design requires producers to encode all the necessary data so that consumers do not need to query the producer for
additional data when processing such an event. Furthermore, the events generated by microservices must comply with
a data type to be correctly processed by consumers, and, as with any other data type, it can evolve over time. This
section discusses the challenges associated with modeling and evolving event schemas in microservice architectures.
5.2.1 Modeling event schemas (CEM1). We observe that how events are modeled and what they represent semantically
may dictate the design and performance of microservices. For example, a developer looks for recommendations for
event design explaining the following scenario [23]:
Manuscript submitted to ACM

26

Laigner et al.
Say you have a micro-service architecture where multiple services produce and consume unit_statuses.
There are multiple ways to design this.
The person continues explaining some options in mind:
1. Create a generic topic unit-status and make services consume and produce messages on this topic.
[...]
2. Create a specific topic for each status, for example unit-status-created,
unit-status-packaged, unit-status-loaded, unit-status-deleted, etc.
In sequence, the practitioner explains the drawbacks of each:
1. This has the consequence that you consume your own messages and have to filter them. 2. Requires
a code or configuration change in potentially all service when a new status topic is added.
In another question [123], a similar inquiry is presented where a practitioner wonders about two event design

approaches:
(1) A sends a message which contains event and related entity id like: entityCreated { entityID: 1234 }.
B consumes this message and if it needs further information, it fetches this from A with entityID
(2) The message not only contains the information above, but also metadata like: entityCreated {
entityID: 1234, SomeFieldKey: someFieldValue, ... }
The practitioner continues addressing the pros and cons of each and wonders which one to choose:
(1) Pros: Less network usage; Always the same structure of messages. Cons: If information from A
is needed on demand there must be some mechanism to catch, e.g. network failures.
(2) Pro: Information is already there. Con: What if the attached information is not enough?
Although practitioners seem aware of some of the consequences different event modeling options bring to the
application design, the excessive number of questions, 19.71% of the total, suggests developers encounter uncertainties
in deciding on an optimal event design.
Discussion: Differently from relational model [26], which provides a formal foundation that allows database designers
to reason about the possible performance implications of a data model (e.g., the level of normalization dictates whether
additional JOIN operations are necessary to retrieve certain information from the database), event design is still an
open problem. As a result, developers navigate through many possible event designs that, if not carefully thought out,
may impact the design of the application and the performance of event-triggered operations.
5.2.2 Evolving event schemas (CEM2). We also observe some microservice practitioners share uncertainties on how
to deal with the possible effects of event schema evolution properly. In particular, as events are often parsed into
microservices’ own data models, practitioners express concerns over the impact of event schema changes in their
microservice states. For instance, upon a new attribute being incorporated into an event’s schema (user’s address), a
developer wonders how to update a microservice state retroactively [47]:
(DEV#1) I can update my event and now include the address, but it will only work for new users, the
old ones will have null addresses. Should I scan the whole database and manually dispatch an event
for each user?
On the other hand, although events are considered abstractions to decouple microservices, some practitioners report
event schema evolution impacting dependent microservices [87]:
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

27

(DEV#2) services are tightly coupled by [event] schema and can causes errors and this contradicts
with event sourcing goal. How can we address this problem?
Evolving event schemas also appear as an important challenge, corresponding to 20.59% of the questions about
managing event schemas in microservices and accounts for 5.02% of the total questions.
Discussion: We observe that developers are aware of the risks associated with schema changes and their potential
impact on microservices dependent on the modified event type. If the type of incoming events does not match the
expected event type in a consumer microservice, the processing of this event processing may fail. However, developers
have not found a systematic solution to either minimize the impact of or comprehensively manage the evolution of
event schemas across the network of dependent microservices.
State-of-the-practice data serialization formats like Apache Avro 12 can potentially ease this challenge. However,
such tools require a global adoption across all microservices, forcing every event producer and consumer to employ
schema and data contract enforcement. Besides, adopting such tools is not always possible because the messaging
technology adopted may not provide native support. In overall, this remains an open challenge in practice.
Finding 5: Developers find no principled ways to model events accounting for performance and decoupling
trade-offs. Systematic support for managing event schema changes is also an open problem.

5.2.3 Implications. With the lack of automatic support for event schema evolution, microservice developers can
isolate failures caused by event schema mismatches and log them appropriately for later reconciliation. Messaging
technology providers can supplement their documentation with more technical examples of how developers can isolate
the microservices’ application code from the impact of event schema changes. Further guidelines on appropriately
rolling out event schema changes without impacting individual microservices in the context of their technologies can
also benefit developers [78]
Researchers can develop analysis tools that holistically map the microservice event topology, matching producer and
consumer microservices through the events exchanged. The tool can incorporate metrics to aid developers in reasoning
about the trade-offs of different event designs. Furthermore, researchers can provide a formal foundation for modeling
events in microservice applications. The model must allow for reasoning about the performance trade-offs of including
specific attributes in events. Lastly, automatic support for event schema evolution across microservices is an open and
complex problem that researchers could tackle.
5.3

Performance

Performance is systematically cited as an important factor for adopting microservice architectures [58, 70, 83]. Developers
seek to reap the benefits of having the application decomposed into independently scalable building blocks [59]. In an
architecture based on events, though, the performance of individual microservices is tightly coupled with its capacity to
process and dispatch application-generated events at a rate that does not compromise the expected performance of the
downstream microservices in the event flow. As a result, disruptions in the event flow can lead to critical performance
impacts. In this section, we analyze such cases from the lens of microservice developers.

12 https://avro.apache.org

Manuscript submitted to ACM

28

Laigner et al.

5.3.1 Event-processing overhead (CP1). Developers report particular event processing scenarios that ultimately lead to
a performance penalty. For example, in connection with CAS5, some practitioners report the need to replay events to
fulfill a given requirement, but that ends up introducing additional load to the application [22]:
The validation of a reservation request needs to know the previous and following reservations
(within 3 hours from the booking time of the incoming request)
if I ask for a reservation for tomorrow, the system will replay reservations from 6 months ago
that usually are not related with the incoming request
The developer then highlight the overhead:
This leads to inefficiencies over time as result of the huge amount of unnecessary events that are
replayed. I thought to solve it using daily snapshots but it seems the wrong way to do it.
In a similar way, in connection with CAS3, other developers acknowledge there could be a performance penalty on
leveraging events for replicating data across microservices. For example [65]:
The Invoices microservice must listen to all
ContactCreated and ContactDeleted events in order to know if the given recipient id is valid.
Then I’d have thousands of Contacts within the Invoices microservice, even if I know that only a
few of them will ever receive an Invoice. Is there any best practice to handle those scenarios?
Practitioners express uncertainties in dealing with the overhead of processing events and their possible performance
impacts. This challenge is the most prominent in the Performance category (53.57%), and spans 5.38% of the total
questions. This suggests that microservices may execute with suboptimal performance in real-world deployments.
Discussion: At first sight, the overhead of the first case can be potentially mitigated by storing the events processed in
the microservice’s private state. However, this technique introduces hidden dangers. For example, keeping track of
the last stored event is nontrivial and can ultimately lead to losing an event due to crashes. Besides, developers tend
to favor the data shipping paradigm [14]. By offloading state management to another system (e.g., database system,
message broker, or cloud object storage), applications can remain stateless, decreasing their complexity. In the second
case, the overhead is triggered by the lack of systematic support for data replication through event management.
5.3.2 Large event payload (CP2). We observe developers also present concerns over the size of the event payload
generated and consumed by different microservices. For instance, a common concern lies in whether publishing events
with large payloads into the message layer entails a good practice:
(DEV #1) My question is, is it wise to stream such file over event bus from Service A to API gateway?
(File may get as large as 100 MB) [90]
(DEV #2) If an event needs to pass a very large volume of data to the next Saga event, how is this done
in terms of the request structure? Is it divided into multiple Sagas for example (as a result pagination
type)? [42]
(DEV #3) I think we will need to go with second option i.e. not sending data in the event due to the
potential size of the event data. [95]
To circumvent the potential performance degradation incurred by processing large event payloads, some developers
look for alternatives to the solo event-driven approach but end up encountering other issues:
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

29

(DEV #3) I was also thinking about adding the URI in the event so that the service just needs to call it. Only
issue I can see is that how would the service know what type to deserialize the response to? [95]
The performance impacts of generating, processing, and storing large event payloads account for 17.86% of
Performance challenges. This challenge represents 1.79% of the total questions and highlights that developers find
difficulties on dealing with large event payloads and their consequences to microservice performance.
Discussion: Message brokers and modern log processing systems are not designed to handle messages with large
payloads natively. Message brokers have historically targeted systems’ integration cases, which usually do not require
large event payloads [83]. Log processing systems, like Kafka, for example, were initially designed for the timely
processing of logs extracted from processes running in distributed servers [57]. Similarly to message brokers, though, it
was never a design goal to accommodate the processing of large log payloads. Native support for these types of objects
is found in cloud storage services and specific column-oriented database systems, like BLOB type in PostgreSQL. 13
Therefore, the questions analyzed in StackOverflow suggest that microservice developers may benefit from either
redesigning their computations to manage large objects in appropriate storage systems or rethinking the granularity of
their event payloads when they grow arbitrarily. This may involve breaking down application components into smaller,
finer-grained tasks to decrease the size of events transmitted across microservices.
5.3.3 Fluctuating event rate (CP3). Developers describe challenges associated with dynamic workloads and their impact
on the observed event processing rate.
(DEV #1) In case of pressure over the system, can service B communicate to service A to slow down,
and A will react to this by not accepting more requests from clients, till B decides it can continue? Is
this something that can be achievable using [(omitted library)]? [86]
(DEV #2) I want to restrict the users from publishing a new message on this topic to prevent my
system from choking after a certain limit.
For example, if the number of unacknowledged messages in the topic is already more than or equal
to 10000, then I want to give a bad input exception or something to restrict users from flooding my
queue. [32]
(DEV #3) Traffic is increasing and we’ve noticed that events spend a lot of time in queue. We need
to process events faster. [...] Is it possible to implement circuit breaker or a failover mechanism for an
async call? [54]
The challenges about adapting microservices to handle increased influx of events represent 28.57% of Performance
questions. Representing 2.87% of the total of questions, this additional performance challenge strengthens the perception that microservice developers encounter difficulties on reaching performance goals in event-driven microservice
architectures.
Discussion: With traditional synchronous communication paradigms, like RPC and HTTP requests, an application
can usually define a threshold of the maximum allowed concurrent connections. In event-based architectures, though,
there is an indirection: the events are often stored in the event management layer first and only later forwarded to (or
pulled by, depending on the system) consumers. This decoupling introduces challenges for consumer microservices
to communicate whether producers must decrease the event generation rate or even refrain from generating new
events. On the other hand, modern event management systems, like Kafka, provide abstractions to parallelize the
13 https://www.postgresql.org/docs/16/largeobjects.html

Manuscript submitted to ACM

30

Laigner et al.

consumption of events through partitions. However, developers must configure the unit of parallelism according to
their requirements, which may not be trivial for newcomers.
Finding 6: Developers encounter challenges on managing the event rate across producers and consumers. This
only exacerbates in the presence of event replays and large event payload sizes.
5.3.4 Implications. Message technology vendors can provide efficient and proactive event-processing techniques and
algorithms that mitigate or decrease the impact of fast producers and slow consumers. As mentioned in the discussion
of individual challenges, developers may benefit from rethinking the granularity of their microservices and the content
included in their event payloads to escape from adding overhead to their event processing pipelines. Developers may
also be aware that, as events flow through microservices, the events generated by each microservice may include
additional data. That suggests developers may track the event payload sizes more carefully as they flow across possibly
many microservices.
Researchers can investigate whether state-of-the-art approaches for scaling distributed systems also apply to event
management in microservices. Besides, researchers can develop systematic tools to mitigate the effects of large payload
sizes in event-based microservice workflows. That could involve optimal deserialization of event payloads (e.g., only
deserializing the subset of attributes that the microservice requires), advanced compression tools that mitigate the
overhead of growing events, and transparent removal of unused event attributes.
5.4

Observability

Observability is a critical concern in modern software development because it allows developers to track important
application behavior and metrics, such as application exceptions and memory usage, respectively [11]. In distributed
systems, such as microservice architectures, observability becomes more critical since problems can possibly span
across multiple components that execute independently in a decentralized manner [11, 113].
In our analysis, we were surprised to find that microservice developers leverage events not only as an abstraction
to process operations asynchronously but also to track the progress of operations across multiple microservices and
troubleshoot the complex interplay of multiple microservices. In this section, we describe these patterns and their
associated challenges.
5.4.1 Event flow observability (CO1). Although tools to observe synchronous requests (HTTP or RPC-based) crossing
microservices enjoy apparent consolidation, developers express challenges in monitoring the asynchronous event flow
across microservices, as exemplified by the two following developers’ quotes:
(DEV #1) What is something we can do to have an end to end understanding from producers to
consumers, etc? Mainly for troubleshooting purposes/change management. [31]
(DEV #2) What is the best way to track the JSON as it flows through many microservices down stream
in an event driven way? [96]
Another example presents a developer wondering whether an observability tool can embrace events:
(DEV #3) Will [(omitted tool)] be able to trace requests done over the eventbus? The tracing page
says that headers need to be propagated through in http or grpc - but the eventbus sends messages via
tcp – does that mean that [(omitted tool)] will not be able to trace requests and show the visualisation
tools[?] [7]
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

31

Furthermore, we found that issues in the message broker only exacerbate the challenge of monitoring how healthy
the event flow is, as explained by a developer [105]:
For any reason the messages get stuck after some time [...] There is nothing in the log files nor
the OS event log. I have to restart the ([omitted technology]) service in order to "reanimate" it.
Afterwards[,] all stuck messages will be processed and everything is working fine until the next
"accident". [...] Does anybody has an idea what I could check additionally to find out what the problem
is?
Observing the event flow appear significantly in Observability challenges (89.47%). This highlights the difficulties
developers find to understand the progress of events as they flow across microservices.
Discussion: Application-generated events serve as natural progress markers. It is a natural choice for developers to
obtain an end-to-end overview of the application execution based on these events. However, developers encounter a
twofold problem. On the one hand, developers find that state-of-the-art observability tools do not natively support
tracking application-generated events. On the other hand, when disruptions in the event flow are not caused by crashes
or bugs in the microservices themselves, developers have difficulties in finding the root problem. Although messaging
technologies are only part of the intricate and heterogeneous components in microservice deployments [59], they are a
core enabler of event-based interactions in microservices. Thus, timely detection of message broker failures and their
relationships with microservice disruptions are key to observability in event-based architectures.
5.4.2 Auditing via event replay (CO2). In CAS5, we discussed how developers leverage events in an attempt to synchronize data across microservices. As a related pattern, we also found that developers use the events as an abstraction to
reproduce some application behavior. Similar to CAS5, developers end up facing difficulties in ensuring the correctness
of the process, as explained by a developer [107]:
(DEV#1:) If the VisitId was deleted across all services we could just replay the events one at a time, in
order, and reproduce an exact copy of the original record.
The developer then mentions an impedance commonly expressed by another practitioner across the questions:
I’ve been using [(omitted message technology)] for the stream itself [...] The issue though is that this is
not suitable for a replay store - only delivery of the event messages.
Another developer warns about the hidden dangers of such a method [116]:
(DEV#2:) What’s maybe not a good idea is trying to recover the current state of your domain model by
replaying an arbitrary set of your events.
Remember, an event isn’t usually a complete representation of the state of the model after the
change, but rather a description of the things that changed. (..)
Auditing past microservice executions through events to observe and further understand their behavior appear in
10.53% of Observability challenges. This suggests that current technologies offer insufficient abstractions to support
event replay effectively.
Discussion: As events often represent intermediate microservice states, they appear as convenient abstractions to
developers seeking to troubleshoot past application behavior. However, in the same vein as CAS5, this practice incurs
hidden challenges due to the lack of appropriate support from current messaging and framework technologies. For
instance, as discussed in CAS7, mismanaging the processing of duplicate events and their possible effects on the
Manuscript submitted to ACM

32

Laigner et al.

application can lead to corrupting a microservice state. Another example, based on CEM1, is that microservices may
even fail to replay events due to the divergence of event schemas.
Finding 7: Developers find difficulties on observing and thus reacting upon disruptions that occur in the event
flow across microservices. These disruptions may not only be caused by microservices, but also message brokers
and network partitions.
5.4.3 Implications. Messaging technology providers can evolve their systems and APIs to provide native integration
with industry-strength observability tools. The integration must account for the needs of developers in their real-world
cases as discussed above, including but not limited to specific metrics such as event processing and acknowledgment
delays from consumers.
For developers, as state-of-the-art abstractions render limited support for safely replaying events, developers can use
a "staging" environment (similar to testing environments with testing, staging, and production [110]) to audit their
event-triggered operations. However, generating an application and message broker state from a previous point in time
for replaying can be challenging.
In the tool development landscape, opportunities for researchers are: (i) They can co-design static analysis tools
and dynamic analysis of event streams for a holistic monitoring of microservice event streams. In particular, this can
aid developers by automatically matching correlated events and associated service disruptions in the event flow. (ii)
They can develop techniques for isolating re-execution of events from impacting the actual microservice states. Recent
tools [63] allows for replaying operations in database-backed applications. However, it is unclear how the approach can
be applied to events and distributed states of microservices.
5.5

Security

Security is another critical concern in event management in microservices. In this section, we discuss developers’
requirements and challenges when ensuring that event ingestion, processing, and storage meet security constraints.
5.5.1 Authentication (CS1). Although events are often an abstraction that is only internally recognized by the microservices, some events may be generated by end users. That requires making public APIs available, which necessarily
exposes the microservice to security vulnerabilities, as exemplified as follows:
(DEV#1) Because I don’t check authorization on websocket open, in theory this approach is vulnerable
to a dDos attack, where an attacker simply opens as many sockets as they can. [18]
On the other hand, even when APIs are safeguarded with authentication methods, developers are concerned about
aligning the validity of the authentication mechanism with the event flow.
(DEV#2) In case of event driven application, it’s possible to ensure the token is valid? In case of failure,
the user clicks on button and an event is written but the processing of this will be hours later. How can I
process the event with the user credentials? [66]
(DEV#3) if I change my communication mechanism to using async messaging (e.g. RabbitMQ), how
would I now authenticate the event to the scope of the user who initiated the event. [108]
Challenges on ensuring event-based workflows and event-triggered computations execute securely appear substantially in Security challenges (76.92%). Spanning across 3.58% of the total questions, that suggests developers fall short
on a holistic solution to secure their event-driven microservices.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

33

Discussion: Aligning authorization mechanisms and event processing is non-trivial. One obstacle is that the authorization and messaging mechanisms are often provided by different systems, resulting in a system integration issue. In
particular, developers working with microservices need to handle authentication token life cycles and make sure that
any events related to the token are in line with its validity. This process can add complexity to the solution.
5.5.2 Data Privacy (CS2). Data privacy emerged as a key requirement in modern applications to prevent leakage of
user data and potential violation of data privacy laws such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 14 . Data
privacy laws prescribe that users can request the removal of their data at any moment, and firms are usually given a
deadline for fulfilling the request. As discussed earlier, in microservices, data flows from the multiple event streams
to many microservice consumers, which in turn apply operations on their private states. This heterogeneous data
placement and movement can make managing data privacy challenging. As exemplified by the following quote [64], we
observe that microservice developers express uncertainties about handling data privacy in event management.
deleting user data in an event-sourced system [...] To which stream is the tombstone event written?
The event stream of the specific user? Or is there an event stream specifically for tombstone events?
to keep some data (e.g. the users’ id), he advises to split the user stream into a public and private
event stream. [...] How can you make sure that both events have been appended?
Managing data privacy in the context of event streams accounts for 23.08% of security challenges. This suggests that
developers find uncertainties on how to properly manage data privacy in events exchanged between microservices.
Discussion: We find that developers often manage data privacy in event streams using ad-hoc solutions, such as
separating privacy and non-privacy data into different streams. However, these mechanisms do not enforce by design
that data leakages do not occur, such as user data contained in events that are not supposed to be processed by certain
consumer microservices. Besides, these mechanisms can lead to consistency problems when it is up to the developer to
ensure privacy and non-privacy streams are in sync.
Finding 8: It is unclear for microservice developers how to properly safeguard security properties in the context
of event processing in microservices.
5.5.3 Implications. Messaging technology providers could provide technology-specific guidelines on properly handling
authentication and data privacy in their systems, accounting for the mechanisms that prevent exposing unintended
event payloads. Cloud providers and framework developers can offer custom deployment templates to facilitate meeting
certain security criteria. However, these should not be oblivious to the event management layer, suggesting that an
appropriate cross-system integration is necessary to fulfill security challenges.
Microservice developers can, by principle, never include sensitive data in their generated events (i.e., privacy-bydesign). However, this can jeopardize the decoupling benefit brought by event-based architecture, requiring consumers
to contact the producer for the missing sensitive data. Researchers can extend existing code analysis tools to alert
developers about bugs and configuration mistakes that can lead to unintended access to events and exposure of private
data in event streams. Besides, researchers can investigate privacy-by-design event management methods without
impact decoupling. For instance, protocols that automatically encrypt sensitive data in events without developer
intervention.
14 https://gdpr.eu/

Manuscript submitted to ACM

34

Laigner et al.
Summary: Microservice developers encounter a myriad of problems when managing events, including dealing
with large event payloads, evolving event schemas, auditing and validating security tokens through events, and
processing events in order.

6

THREATS TO VALIDITY

In this section, we discuss the threats to the validity of our empirical study.
Selection bias of the source. Similar to previous research [8, 121, 124], our work uses SO as the data source to
study the challenges developers encounter in practice. Although other data sources could supplement the findings,
the heterogeneity of challenges, application scenarios, and developer expertise found in SO enables a trustworthy
reflection of the state of the practice. For instance, the findings are aligned with several blog posts that report similar
challenges [20, 35, 44, 75, 76, 97, 98, 101, 102, 125].
Construction of tag set. We select a set of tags to filter SO questions associated with event management in microservice
architectures. The relevant keywords and metric applied may omit some tags associated with event management in
microservices. To mitigate this threat, we rely on manual inspection conducted by independent researchers, and we
adopt the lowest threshold used in previous work [8, 121, 124] to include the highest amount of tags as possible.
Subjective of researchers. Since we adopt manual analysis to identify and categorize challenges, that may threaten
our findings’ validity. To minimize this threat, the first two authors analyzed and classified each filtered question in
isolation. Upon conflicts, an experienced arbitrator coordinated the discussion to reach an agreement.
Generalizability of our findings. We recognize that the application scenarios, requirements, design choices, event
processing patterns, and the challenges extracted from SO may not be generalizable to all possible cloud and data
platforms to which event-driven microservices can be deployed to. However, as SO is an industry-strength questions
& answers platform for developers, their questions tend to shed light on the most adopted industrial practices. Thus,
the 10-year question range covered in this study strengthens our perception that the findings highlight a substantial
portion of the challenges in the state of the practice.
7

RELATED WORK

In this section, we summarize related work on challenges that developers face in microservice architectures.
Benefits of microservice adoption. Zhang et al. [127, 128] conduct interviews with microservice practitioners to
understand the benefits brought about by microservice adoption. They find organizational transformation, decomposition, distributed monitoring, and bug localization as prominent challenges. Wang et al. [118] interview and survey
practitioners to collect and categorize best practices, challenges, and their related successful solutions employed by
practitioners. They find managing API changes, lack of support for monitoring, and finding microservice granularity as
common challenges.
Microservice issues. Zhou et al. [129] performed a survey to characterize typical faults, debugging practices, and the
challenges entailed by troubleshooting failures in microservice architectures. They find microservice developers can
benefit from improved trace visualization tools, specially in cases related to microservice interactions. Ramírez et al. [89]
mine SO posts to identify common issues on development and testing microservice applications. They find missing
parameters as a prominent issue in communicating with other microservices, wrong library versions as the main
impediment for service discovery, and connecting to other microservices with correct user credentials as an example of
authentication & authorization challenge. Waseem et al. [119] employ a mixed-method empirical study to understand
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

35

the types of issues microservice developers experience. Similarly to Ramírez et al. [89], they find programming errors,
missing artifacts, invalid configuration and communication as the main causes behind the issues.
Data Management in Microservices. Laigner et al. [59] characterize data management challenges in microservice
architectures through a mixed-method empirical study. They focus on analyzing developers’ pitfalls when implementing
data management logic in the application layer and discussing the limitations of state-of-the-art database systems that
prevent them from better serving microservice architectures.
Event Sourcing Pattern. Overeem et al. [78] study the challenges practitioners experience using event sourcing.
Through interviews with 25 engineers, they find event system evolution, steep learning curve, lack of available
technology, rebuilding projections, and data privacy as the main issues affecting the development of systems that
employ the event sourcing pattern. From 19 systems mentioned by interviewees, only 8 apply the microservice
architectural style.
Security in Microservices. Nasab et al. [71] performs a mixed-method empirical study to understand the security
practices in microservice systems. They collect 28 security practices open-source repositories and SO posts, which were
later confirmed through a survey with practitioners.
Exploratory Studies in Microservices. Hacaloglu and Demirors [46] study the usefulness of events for software
size measurement. They find preliminary evidence that events can supplement software size measurement techniques.
Lazzari and Farias [36] reports an exploratory study that compares event-driven and REST architectural styles in
the context of modularity. They find preliminary evidence that event-driven architecture improves the separation of
concerns.
Overall, we observe that challenges related to event management are overlooked in the literature. For instance,
although few works report developers mentioning possible issues with message technology systems [71, 119] and
asynchronous task invocation [89, 129], they are often addressed as general microservice configuration or invocation
problems, preventing a proper characterization of the problem. Therefore, although event management in microservices
has been rapidly gaining industry popularity [20, 35, 44, 59, 75, 76, 97, 98, 101, 102, 125], it has not received due attention
from the research community. In this work, we make the first attempt to investigate the specific challenges that
developers face when managing events in microservice architectures.

8

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we mine and analyze several relevant Stack Overflow questions to characterize the state of the practice
and the challenges microservice developers face while managing events. We identify key patterns developers use
while attempting to realize their functional and non-functional requirements, suggesting a tension between achieving
requirements related to data consistency, loose coupling, and performance.
To further understand these tensions, we manually examined 628 sampled questions and identified key challenges
microservice developers face in varied application scenarios. These include issues related to queuing, delivering, and
processing events at the application level, as well as monitoring and securing the event flow. Based on the myriad of
practical findings, we provide actionable implications for messaging systems, framework maintainers, cloud providers,
and researchers.
We hope that the results drive the reflection of microservice developers and researchers to escape from the dangers
of asynchronous, event-based designs and to build event management technologies that meet the expectations of
microservice developers respectively.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

36

Laigner et al.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jean Mello and Marcos Antonio Vaz Salles for early discussions and initial drafting of this manuscript.
This work was supported by the PAPRICAS.org project - Independent Research Fund of Denmark (Number 913100077B). Part of the computation done for this project was performed on the UCloud interactive HPC system.
REFERENCES
[1] Yalemisew Abgaz, Andrew McCarren, Peter Elger, David Solan, Neil Lapuz, Marin Bivol, Glenn Jackson, Murat Yilmaz, Jim Buckley, and Paul
Clarke. 2023. Decomposition of Monolith Applications Into Microservices Architectures: A Systematic Review. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 49, 8 (2023), 4213–4242. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2023.3287297
[2] Tyler Akidau, Robert Bradshaw, Craig Chambers, Slava Chernyak, Rafael J. Fernández-Moctezuma, Reuven Lax, Sam McVeety, Daniel Mills,
Frances Perry, Eric Schmidt, and Sam Whittle. 2015. The Dataflow Model: A Practical Approach to Balancing Correctness, Latency, and Cost in
Massive-Scale, Unbounded, Out-of-Order Data Processing. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 8 (2015), 1792–1803.
[3] annemartijn. [n. d.]. How to recover from missed integration or notification events in event driven architecture? Retrieved July 29, 2024 from
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/65425071/how-to-recover-from-missed-integration-or-notification-events-in-event-driven-ar
[4] .NET Application Architecture Reference Apps. 2024. eShopOnContainers. https://github.com/dotnet-architecture/eShopOnContainers
[5] Michael Armbrust, Armando Fox, Rean Griffith, Anthony D. Joseph, Randy Katz, Andy Konwinski, Gunho Lee, David Patterson, Ariel Rabkin, Ion
Stoica, and Matei Zaharia. 2010. A view of cloud computing. Commun. ACM 53, 4 (apr 2010), 50–58. https://doi.org/10.1145/1721654.1721672
[6] Imran Arshad. [n. d.]. Microservices client acknowledgement and Event Sourcing. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/
54451013/microservices-client-acknowledgement-and-event-sourcing
[7] Asad Awadia. [n. d.]. Istio request tracing for vert.x event bus messages. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/51123104/
istio-request-tracing-for-vert-x-event-bus-messages
[8] Mehdi Bagherzadeh and Raffi Khatchadourian. 2019. Going Big: A Large-Scale Study on What Big Data Developers Ask. In Proceedings of the 2019
27th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (Tallinn, Estonia)
(ESEC/FSE 2019). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 432–442. https://doi.org/10.1145/3338906.3338939
[9] Alan Bandeira, Carlos Alberto Medeiros, Matheus Paixao, and Paulo Henrique Maia. 2019. We Need to Talk About Microservices: an Analysis from
the Discussions on StackOverflow. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 16th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE, Montreal, QC,
Canada, 255–259. https://doi.org/10.1109/MSR.2019.00051
[10] Tim Berglund. [n. d.]. Introduction to Apache Kafka Partitions. Retrieved June 8, 2024 from https://developer.confluent.io/courses/apachekafka/partitions/
[11] Ivan Beschastnikh, Perry Liu, Albert Xing, Patty Wang, Yuriy Brun, and Michael D. Ernst. 2020. Visualizing Distributed System Executions. ACM
Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 29, 2, Article 9 (mar 2020), 38 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3375633
[12] Michal Borowiecki. [n. d.]. Data Consistency Across Microservices. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43950808/dataconsistency-across-microservices/44748028#44748028
[13] Susanne Braun, Stefan Deßloch, Eberhard Wolff, Frank Elberzhager, and Andreas Jedlitschka. 2021. Tackling Consistency-related Design Challenges
of Distributed Data-Intensive Systems: An Action Research Study. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM / IEEE International Symposium on Empirical
Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM) (Bari, Italy) (ESEM ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 20,
11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3475716.3475771
[14] Sergey Bykov, Alan Geller, Gabriel Kliot, Jim Larus, Ravi Pandya, and Jorgen Thelin. 2010. Orleans: A Framework for Cloud Computing. Technical
Report MSR-TR-2010-159. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/orleans-a-framework-for-cloud-computing/
[15] Hebert Cabane and Kleinner Farias. 2024. On the impact of event-driven architecture on performance: An exploratory study. Future Generation
Computer Systems 153 (2024), 52–69.
[16] CallMeTheBreeze. [n. d.]. What is the best way to implement a fast, scalable statistics aggregation architecture? Retrieved July 29, 2024 from
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/30583466/what-is-the-best-way-to-implement-a-fast-scalable-statistics-aggregation-archit
[17] Paris Carbone, Stephan Ewen, Gyula Fóra, Seif Haridi, Stefan Richter, and Kostas Tzoumas. 2017. State Management in Apache Flink®: Consistent
Stateful Distributed Stream Processing. Proc. VLDB Endow. 10, 12 (2017), 1718–1729.
[18] John Chang. [n. d.]. Can I rely on ConnectionId for security with API Gateway Websockets? Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/
questions/61737655/can-i-rely-on-connectionid-for-security-with-api-gateway-websockets
[19] Chunyang Chen and Zhenchang Xing. 2016. Mining technology landscape from stack overflow. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM/IEEE International
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement. 1–10.
[20] Dmitry Chornyi. [n. d.]. Engineering Uber’s Next-Gen Payments Platform. Uber Technologies Inc. https://eng.uber.com/payments-platform
(Accessed on 2021-03-08).
[21] Christian Paesante Chris. [n. d.]. CQRS - out of order messages. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/53270770/cqrsout-of-order-messages
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

37

[22] Christian. [n. d.]. Event sourcing - Event streams clarification. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/53949531/eventsourcing-event-streams-clarification
[23] Christophe. [n. d.]. Is it bad practice to produce and consume messages from the same topic? Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/
questions/45486658/is-it-bad-practice-to-produce-and-consume-messages-from-the-same-topic
[24] L. Chung, B.A. Nixon, E. Yu, and J. Mylopoulos. 2012. Non-Functional Requirements in Software Engineering. Springer US, New York, NY, USA.
https://books.google.dk/books?id=MNrcBwAAQBAJ
[25] Google Cloud. [n. d.]. What is a Hybrid Cloud? Retrieved June 19, 2024 from https://cloud.google.com/learn/what-is-hybrid-cloud
[26] E. F. Codd. 1970. A relational model of data for large shared data banks. Commun. ACM 13, 6 (jun 1970), 377–387. https://doi.org/10.1145/362384.
362685
[27] code pendent. [n. d.]. How to implement a microservice Event Driven architecture with Spring Cloud Stream Kafka and Database per service. Retrieved
July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/42140285/how-to-implement-a-microservice-event-driven-architecture-with-springcloud-stre
[28] codependent. [n. d.]. Spring Cloud Stream Kafka - Eventual consistency - Does Kafka auto retry unacknowledged messages (when using autocommitoffset=false). Retrieved June 19, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/42230797/spring-cloud-stream-kafka-eventual-consistency-doeskafka-auto-retry-unackno
[29] code_pendent. [n. d.]. Spring Cloud Stream Kafka - Eventual consistency - Does Kafka auto retry unacknowledged messages (when using autocommitoffset=false). Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/42230797/spring-cloud-stream-kafka-eventual-consistencydoes-kafka-auto-retry-unackno
[30] Dapr. [n. d.]. Workflow patterns. Retrieved July 10, 2024 from https://docs.dapr.io/developing-applications/building-blocks/workflow/workflowpatterns
[31] deblearns1. [n. d.]. Kafka implementation - how to see end to end workflows with microservices. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.
com/questions/65500926/kafka-implementation-how-to-see-end-to-end-workflows-with-microservices
[32] Shalaka Deshpande. [n. d.]. How to restrict publishing to a topic in GCP pub/sub based on number of unacknowledged messages in the queue? Retrieved
July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/74064658/how-to-restrict-publishing-to-a-topic-in-gcp-pub-sub-based-on-number-ofunacknow
[33] Santanu Dey. [n. d.]. Data Consistency Across Microservices. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43950808/dataconsistency-across-microservices
[34] Paolo Di Francesco, Patricia Lago, and Ivano Malavolta. 2018. Migrating Towards Microservice Architectures: An Industrial Survey. In 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Software Architecture (ICSA). IEEE, Seattle, WA, USA, 29–2909. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSA.2018.00012
[35] Uber Engineering. 2020. Revolutionizing Money Movements at Scale with Strong Data Consistency. Uber Technologies Inc. https://eng.uber.com/
money-scale-strong-data (Accessed on 2021-03-08).
[36] Kleinner Farias and Luan Lazzari. 2023. Event-driven Architecture and REST Architectural Style: An Exploratory Study on Modularity. Journal of
Applied Research and Technology 21, 3 (Jun. 2023), 338–351. https://doi.org/10.22201/icat.24486736e.2023.21.3.1764
[37] Danica Fine and Nikoleta Verbeck. 2022. Diagnose and Debug Apache Kafka Issues: Understanding Increased Consumer Rebalance Time: Increased
Consumer Rebalance Time. Retrieved June 19, 2024 from https://www.confluent.io/blog/debug-apache-kafka-pt-3/
[38] Martin Fowler. 2006. Focusing on Events. Martin Fowler. Retrieved July 3, 2024 from https://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventNarrative.html
[39] Martin Fowler. 2017. What do you mean by “Event-Driven”? Martin Fowler. Retrieved June 22, 2024 from https://martinfowler.com/articles/201701event-driven.html
[40] Marios Fragkoulis, Paris Carbone, Vasiliki Kalavri, and Asterios Katsifodimos. 2023. A Survey on the Evolution of Stream Processing Systems.
arXiv:2008.00842 [cs.DC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.00842
[41] Paolo Francesco, Ivano Malavolta, and Patricia Lago. 2017. Research on Architecting Microservices: Trends, Focus, and Potential for Industrial
Adoption. In International Conference on Software Architecture. 21–30. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSA.2017.24
[42] Victor França. [n. d.]. Saga Choreography implementation problems. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/48487098/sagachoreography-implementation-problems
[43] Renato Gama. [n. d.]. How to trigger an action only after receiving two or more events in an event driven architecture? Retrieved July 29, 2024 from
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/51421205/how-to-trigger-an-action-only-after-receiving-two-or-more-events-in-an-event-dri
[44] Adam Gluck. [n. d.]. Introducing Domain-Oriented Microservice Architecture. Uber Technologies Inc. https://www.uber.com/en-DK/blog/
microservice-architecture/
[45] Nicolas E Gold and Jens Krinke. 2022. Ethics in the mining of software repositories. Empirical Software Engineering 27, 1 (2022), 17.
[46] Tuna Hacaloglu and Onur Demirors. 2023. An exploratory case study using events as a software size measure. Information Technology and
Management 24 (04 2023), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10799-023-00394-y
[47] hendoe. [n. d.]. Approaches to update microservices databases retroactively. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/
59923240/approaches-to-update-microservices-databases-retroactively
[48] Fabian Hueske and Vasiliki Kalavri. 2019. Stream processing with Apache Flink: fundamentals, implementation, and operation of streaming applications.
O’Reilly Media.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

38

Laigner et al.

[49] ignacy. [n. d.]. Starting new Kafka Streams microservice, when there is data retention period on input topics. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/67074772/starting-new-kafka-streams-microservice-when-there-is-data-retention-period-on
[50] Workflow Patterns Initiative. [n. d.]. Workflow Patterns. Retrieved July 10, 2024 from http://www.workflowpatterns.com
[51] joe gates. [n. d.]. how to deal with replication lag in microservices. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/71971389/howto-deal-with-replication-lag-in-microservices
[52] Jordi. [n. d.]. saga pattern: what about if compensation action fails. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/73108942/sagapattern-what-about-if-compensation-action-fails
[53] jsc31994. [n. d.]. Why is Kafka Streams in Node sending me duplicate payloads after I terminate the process and run once more? Retrieved July 29,
2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/63391504/why-is-kafka-streams-in-node-sending-me-duplicate-payloads-after-i-terminate-the
[54] Julio. [n. d.]. Microservices async communication circuit breaker. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/68307199/
microservices-async-communication-circuit-breaker
[55] KitKarson. [n. d.]. Data Dependency Among Microservices. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/70509292/datadependency-among-microservices
[56] Martin Kleppmann, Alastair R. Beresford, and Boerge Svingen. 2019. Online Event Processing: Achieving Consistency Where Distributed
Transactions Have Failed. Queue 17, 1 (feb 2019), 116–136. https://doi.org/10.1145/3317287.3321612
[57] Jay Kreps, Neha Narkhede, Jun Rao, et al. 2011. Kafka: A distributed messaging system for log processing. In Proceedings of the NetDB, Vol. 11. 1–7.
[58] Rodrigo Laigner, Marcos Kalinowski, Pedro Diniz, Leonardo Barros, Carlos Cassino, Melissa Lemos, Darlan Arruda, Sérgio Lifschitz, and Yongluan
Zhou. 2020. From a Monolithic Big Data System to a Microservices Event-Driven Architecture. In 2020 46th Euromicro Conference on Software
Engineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA). IEEE, Portoroz, Slovenia, 213–220. https://doi.org/10.1109/SEAA51224.2020.00045
[59] Rodrigo Laigner, Yongluan Zhou, Marcos Antonio Vaz Salles, Yijian Liu, and Marcos Kalinowski. 2021. Data Management in Microservices: State of
the Practice, Challenges, and Research Directions. Proc. VLDB Endow. 14, 13 (2021), XXX–XXX. https://doi.org/10.14778/3484224.3484232
[60] L. Lamport. 1977. Proving the Correctness of Multiprocess Programs. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering SE-3, 2 (1977), 125–143.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.1977.229904
[61] Lerman. [n. d.]. nternal k8s services communication not balanced. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/73349618/internalk8s-services-communication-not-balanced
[62] Anna Lesniak, Rodrigo Laigner, and Yongluan Zhou. 2021. Enforcing Consistency in Microservice Architectures through Event-Based Constraints.
In International Conference on Distributed and Event-Based Systems (DEBS). 180–183.
[63] Qian Li, Peter Kraft, Michael Cafarella, Çağatay Demiralp, Goetz Graefe, Christos Kozyrakis, Michael Stonebraker, Lalith Suresh, Xiangyao Yu,
and Matei Zaharia. 2023. R3: Record-Replay-Retroaction for Database-Backed Applications. Proc. VLDB Endow. 16, 11 (jul 2023), 3085–3097.
https://doi.org/10.14778/3611479.3611510
[64] Florian Ludewig. [n. d.]. Deleting Events with Tombstones and Public / Private Data in an Event-Sourced System. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57784098/deleting-events-with-tombstones-and-public-private-data-in-an-event-sourced-sy
[65] Benjamin M. [n. d.]. CQRS + Microservices: How to handle relations / validation? Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/
42528718/cqrs-microservices-how-to-handle-relations-validation
[66] Matthias. [n. d.]. Spring Security OAuth2 AuthorizationServer. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/29148547/springsecurity-oauth2-authorizationserver
[67] Nabor C Mendonça, Craig Box, Costin Manolache, and Louis Ryan. 2021. The monolith strikes back: Why istio migrated from microservices to a
monolithic architecture. IEEE software 38, 5 (2021), 17–22.
[68] Hamdy Michael Ayas, Philipp Leitner, and Regina Hebig. 2023. An empirical study of the systemic and technical migration towards microservices.
Empirical Software Engineering 28, 4 (2023), 85.
[69] C. Mohan and B. Lindsay. 1985. Efficient commit protocols for the tree of processes model of distributed transactions. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 19, 2
(apr 1985), 40–52. https://doi.org/10.1145/850770.850772
[70] Gastón Márquez, Mónica M. Villegas, and Hernán Astudillo. 2018. An Empirical Study of Scalability Frameworks in Open Source Microservices-based
Systems. In 2018 37th International Conference of the Chilean Computer Science Society (SCCC). 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/SCCC.2018.8705256
[71] Ali Rezaei Nasab, Mojtaba Shahin, Seyed Ali Hoseyni Raviz, Peng Liang, Amir Mashmool, and Valentina Lenarduzzi. 2023. An empirical study of
security practices for microservices systems. Journal of Systems and Software 198 (2023), 111563.
[72] Arthur Navarro, Julien Ponge, Frédéric Le Mouël, and Clément Escoffier. 2023. Considerations for integrating virtual threads in a Java framework:
a Quarkus example in a resource-constrained environment. In DEBS’2023 - 17TH ACM International Conference on Distributed and Event-Based
Systems, ACM (Ed.). University of Neuchâtel, Neuchatel, Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1145/3583678.3596895
[73] Sam Newman. 2015. Building Microservices (1st ed.). O’Reilly Media, Inc., Sebastopol, CA.
[74] nik2o. [n. d.]. Join data in CQRS patterns from different microservices. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57328269/joindata-in-cqrs-patterns-from-different-microservices
[75] Nubank. 2017. Architecting a Modern Financial Institution. Nubank. https://www.infoq.com/presentations/nubank-architecture/ (Accessed on
2022-02-11).
[76] Nubank. 2019. Microservices at Nubank, an overview. Nubank. https://building.nubank.com.br/microservices-at-nubank-an-overview (Accessed
on 2021-03-08).
Manuscript submitted to ACM

An Empirical Study on Challenges of Event Management in Microservice Architectures

39

[77] Odsh. [n. d.]. CQRS: project out-of-order notifications in an ElasticSearch read model. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/
questions/47516458/cqrs-project-out-of-order-notifications-in-an-elasticsearch-read-model
[78] Michiel Overeem, Marten Spoor, Slinger Jansen, and Sjaak Brinkkemper. 2021. An empirical characterization of event sourced systems and their
schema evolution — Lessons from industry. Journal of Systems and Software 178 (2021), 110970. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2021.110970
[79] oznomal. [n. d.]. How to monitor REST Endpoint for long running jobs. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/56923600/
how-to-monitor-rest-endpoint-for-long-running-jobs
[80] Christian Paesante. [n. d.]. AWS Event-Sourcing implementation. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/52632129/awsevent-sourcing-implementation
[81] Igor Petrov. [n. d.]. SAGA and local transactions with Kafka and Postgres in Spring Boot. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/
questions/62223553/saga-and-local-transactions-with-kafka-and-postgres-in-spring-boot
[82] Praveen. [n. d.]. Aggregates in Event Sourcing Pattern. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/49985156/aggregates-inevent-sourcing-pattern
[83] Dan Pritchett. 2008. BASE: An Acid Alternative: In Partitioned Databases, Trading Some Consistency for Availability Can Lead to Dramatic
Improvements in Scalability. Queue 6, 3 (may 2008), 48–55. https://doi.org/10.1145/1394127.1394128
[84] Psyxto. [n. d.]. Eventual consistency data orchestration in microservices RabbitMq broker. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/
questions/71160328/eventual-consistency-data-orchestration-in-microservices-rabbitmq-broker
[85] Maciej Pszczolinski. [n. d.]. DB Transaction and Integrations Events dispatch - how to make it atomic? Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https:
//stackoverflow.com/questions/62364508/db-transaction-and-integrations-events-dispatch-how-to-make-it-atomic
[86] raduone. [n. d.]. Can the consumer slow down the producer, if the producer is in a different service, using Reactor Kafka? Retrieved July 29, 2024 from
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57181251/can-the-consumer-slow-down-the-producer-if-the-producer-is-in-a-different-servi
[87] Milad Raeisi. [n. d.]. Microservice design: change on data requirements or schema. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/
68781332/microservice-design-change-on-data-requirements-or-schema
[88] Rafiq. [n. d.]. How to handle multiple update event when there is more then one replica of a pod. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.
com/questions/67612615/how-to-handle-multiple-update-event-when-there-is-more-then-one-replica-of-a-pod
[89] Francisco Ramírez, Carlos Mera-Gómez, Rami Bahsoon, and Yuqun Zhang. 2021. An empirical study on microservice software development.
In 2021 IEEE/ACM Joint 9th International Workshop on Software Engineering for Systems-of-Systems and 15th Workshop on Distributed Software
Development, Software Ecosystems and Systems-of-Systems (SESoS/WDES). IEEE, IEEE, Madrid, Spain, 16–23.
[90] Tharindu Ranasingha. [n. d.]. Is it wise to stream file over vertx event bus. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/
51665264/is-it-wise-to-stream-file-over-vertx-event-bus
[91] Rasmond. [n. d.]. What to do when exception is thrown after state is modified? Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/
73928296/what-to-do-when-exception-is-thrown-after-state-is-modified
[92] Chris Richardson. [n. d.]. A pattern language for microservices. Retrieved October 1, 2023 from https://microservices.io/patterns/index.html
[93] Chris Richardson. 2022. Pattern: Saga. Chris Richardson Consulting, Inc. https://microservices.io/patterns/data/saga.html (Accessed on 2022-03-02).
[94] Robert. [n. d.]. Event publisher for ASP.NET Web Api. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/39305118/event-publisherfor-asp-net-web-api
[95] sam. [n. d.]. Refreshing microservice data with event messages. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/64049385/refreshingmicroservice-data-with-event-messages
[96] Santosh. [n. d.]. Best way to track/trace a JSON Object (a time series data) as it flows through a system of microservices on a IOT platform. Retrieved
July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/63699141/best-way-to-track-trace-a-json-object-a-time-series-data-as-it-flows-through-a
[97] Airbnb Engineering & Data Science. 2018. Measuring Transactional Integrity in Airbnb’s Distributed Payment Ecosystem. https://medium.com/airbnbengineering/measuring-transactional-integrity-in-airbnbs-distributed-payment-ecosystem-a670d6926d22 (Accessed on 2023-02-25).
[98] Airbnb Engineering & Data Science. 2019. Avoiding Double Payments in a Distributed Payments System. https://medium.com/airbnb-engineering/
avoiding-double-payments-in-a-distributed-payments-system-2981f6b070bb (Accessed on 2021-03-08).
[99] C.B. Seaman. 1999. Qualitative methods in empirical studies of software engineering. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 25, 4 (1999),
557–572. https://doi.org/10.1109/32.799955
[100] Sesigl. [n. d.]. Use Kafka to increase resilience of a new service. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/48912603/usekafka-to-increase-resilience-of-a-new-service
[101] Natan Silnitsky. 2022. Event Driven Architecture — 5 Pitfalls to Avoid. Wix. Retrieved July 1, 2023 from https://medium.com/wix-engineering/eventdriven-architecture-5-pitfalls-to-avoid-b3ebf885bdb1
[102] Natan Silnitsky. 2022. Troubleshooting Kafka for 2000 Microservices at Wix. Wix. Retrieved July 1, 2023 from https://medium.com/wixengineering/troubleshooting-kafka-for-2000-microservices-at-wix-986ee382fd1e
[103] Inc. Stack Exchange. 2023. Stack Exchange Data Dump. Stack Exchange, Inc. Retrieved September, 2023 from https://archive.org/details/
stackexchange
[104] Stack Exchange Inc 2023. Stack Overflow. Stack Exchange Inc. Retrieved July, 2023 from http://www.stackoverflow.com/
[105] Stoffelchen. [n. d.]. ActiveMQ 5.16.1 - Messages get stuck. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/67565608/activemq-516-1-messages-get-stuck
Manuscript submitted to ACM

40

Laigner et al.

[106] Ruoyu Su, Xiaozhou Li, and Davide Taibi. 2024. From Microservice to Monolith: A Multivocal Literature Review. Electronics 13, 8 (2024), 1452.
[107] Johnathon Sullinger. [n. d.]. Microservices + CQRS implementation. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/62142695/
microservices-cqrs-implementation
[108] Carl Thomas. [n. d.]. How to authenticate async event messaging between services in microservice architecture. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/62109564/how-to-authenticate-async-event-messaging-between-services-in-microservice-archi
[109] TrueWill. [n. d.]. Ensuring that all messages have been read from Kafka topic using REST Proxy. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.
com/questions/57222357/ensuring-that-all-messages-have-been-read-from-kafka-topic-using-rest-proxy
[110] Umbraco. [n. d.]. What is a Staging Environment? Retrieved June, 2024 from https://umbraco.com/knowledge-base/staging-environment/
[111] user2079172. [n. d.]. Long running REST API with queues. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/33009721/long-runningrest-api-with-queues
[112] user3154653. [n. d.]. Microservice Architecture dependency. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43378165/microservicearchitecture-dependency
[113] Muhammad Usman, Simone Ferlin, Anna Brunstrom, and Javid Taheri. 2022. A Survey on Observability of Distributed Edge & Container-Based
Microservices. IEEE Access 10 (2022), 86904–86919. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3193102
[114] Guilherme Vale, Filipe Figueiredo Correia, Eduardo Martins Guerra, Thatiane de Oliveira Rosa, Jonas Fritzsch, and Justus Bogner. 2022. Designing
microservice systems using patterns: an empirical study on quality trade-offs. In 2022 IEEE 19th International Conference on Software Architecture
(ICSA). IEEE, IEEE, Honolulu, HI, USA, 69–79.
[115] Nicolas Viennot, Mathias Lécuyer, Jonathan Bell, Roxana Geambasu, and Jason Nieh. 2015. Synapse: A Microservices Architecture for HeterogeneousDatabase Web Applications. In Proceedings of the Tenth European Conference on Computer Systems (Bordeaux, France) (EuroSys ’15). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 21, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2741948.2741975
[116] VoiceOfUnreason. [n. d.]. Aggregates in Event Sourcing Pattern. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/49985156/
aggregates-in-event-sourcing-pattern/49986434#49986434
[117] Pavel Voronin. [n. d.]. What are the strategies/frameworks for adding new services to the system where integration is based on asynchronous messages?
[closed]. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/56851950/what-are-the-strategies-frameworks-for-adding-newservices-to-the-system-where-i
[118] Yingying Wang, Harshavardhan Kadiyala, and Julia Rubin. 2021. Promises and challenges of microservices: an exploratory study. Empirical
Software Engineering 26, 4 (2021), 63.
[119] Muhammad Waseem, Peng Liang, Aakash Ahmad, Arif Ali Khan, Mojtaba Shahin, Pekka Abrahamsson, Ali Rezaei Nasab, and Tommi Mikkonen.
2023. Understanding the Issues, Their Causes and Solutions in Microservices Systems: An Empirical Study. arXiv:2302.01894 [cs.SE]
[120] Muhammad Waseem, Peng Liang, and Mojtaba Shahin. 2020. A systematic mapping study on microservices architecture in devops. Journal of
Systems and Software 170 (2020), 110798.
[121] Jinfeng Wen, Zhenpeng Chen, Yi Liu, Yiling Lou, Yun Ma, Gang Huang, Xin Jin, and Xuanzhe Liu. 2021. An Empirical Study on Challenges of
Application Development in Serverless Computing. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (Athens, Greece) (ESEC/FSE 2021). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 416–428. https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3468558
[122] Laurent Wilfred. [n. d.]. Microservice archtecture data sharing/management. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/
53100208/microservice-archtecture-data-sharing-management
[123] xm22. [n. d.]. Messaging: How do your messages look like. Retrieved July 29, 2024 from https://stackoverflow.com/questions/53025888/messaginghow-do-your-messages-look-like
[124] Xin-Li Yang, David Lo, Xin Xia, Zhi-Yuan Wan, and Jian-Ling Sun. 2016. What security questions do developers ask? a large-scale study of stack
overflow posts. Journal of Computer Science and Technology 31 (2016), 910–924.
[125] Yang Yang, Zhifeng Chen, Qichao Chu, Haitao Zhang, and George Teo. [n. d.]. Enabling Seamless Kafka Async Queuing with Consumer Proxy. Uber
Technologies Inc. https://www.uber.com/en-SE/blog/kafka-async-queuing-with-consumer-proxy/
[126] K. Youssefi and E. Wong. 1979. Query Processing In A Relational Database Management System. In Fifth International Conference on Very Large
Data Bases, 1979. 409–417. https://doi.org/10.1109/VLDB.1979.718156
[127] He Zhang, Shanshan Li, Zijia Jia, Chenxing Zhong, and Cheng Zhang. 2019. Microservice architecture in reality: An industrial inquiry. In 2019
IEEE international conference on software architecture (ICSA). IEEE, IEEE, Hamburg, Germany, 51–60.
[128] Xin Zhou, Shanshan Li, Lingli Cao, He Zhang, Zijia Jia, Chenxing Zhong, Zhihao Shan, and Muhammad Ali Babar. 2023. Revisiting the
practices and pains of microservice architecture in reality: An industrial inquiry. Journal of Systems and Software 195 (2023), 111521. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2022.111521
[129] Xiang Zhou, Xin Peng, Tao Xie, Jun Sun, Chao Ji, Wenhai Li, and Dan Ding. 2021. Fault Analysis and Debugging of Microservice Systems: Industrial
Survey, Benchmark System, and Empirical Study. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 47, 2 (2021), 243–260. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.
2018.2887384
[130] Olaf Zimmermann. 2017. Microservices Tenets. Comput. Sci. 32, 3-4 (2017), 301–310.

Manuscript submitted to ACM

