Article

A Container-Native IAM Framework for Secure Green Mobility:
A Case Study with Keycloak and Kubernetes
Alexandre Sousa 1, * , Frederico Branco 2 , Arsénio Reis 2
1

2

3

*

and Manuel J. C. S. Reis 3

Engineering Departement, Quinta de Prados, University of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro,
5000-801 Vila Real, Portugal
Engineering Departement/INESC-TEC, Quinta de Prados, University of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro,
5000-801 Vila Real, Portugal; fbranco@utad.pt (F.B.); ars@utad.pt (A.R.)
Engineering Departement/IEETA, Quinta de Prados, University of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro,
5000-801 Vila Real, Portugal; mcabral@utad.pt
Correspondence: al68740@alunos.utad.pt

Abstract
The rapid adoption of green mobility solutions—such as electric-vehicle sharing and intelligent transportation systems—has accelerated the integration of Internet of Things (IoT)
technologies, introducing complex security and performance challenges. While conceptual
Identity and Access Management (IAM) frameworks exist, few are empirically validated
for the scale, heterogeneity, and real-time demands of modern mobility ecosystems. This
work presents a data-backed, container-native reference architecture for secure and resilient
Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) in green mobility environments.
The framework integrates Keycloak within a Kubernetes-orchestrated infrastructure and
applies Zero Trust and defense-in-depth principles. Effectiveness is demonstrated through
rigorous benchmarking across latency, throughput, memory footprint, and automated fault
recovery. Compared to a monolithic baseline, the proposed architecture achieves over 300%
higher throughput, 90% faster startup times, and 75% lower idle memory usage while
enabling full service restoration in under one minute. This work establishes a validated
deployment blueprint for IAM in IoT-driven transportation systems, offering a practical
foundation for a secure and scalable mobility infrastructure.
Academic Editors: Abdul Majeed and
Safiullah Khan
Received: 6 August 2025
Revised: 2 September 2025

Keywords: identity and access management; green mobility; IoT security; authentication
and authorization; Kubernetes; Keycloak; container orchestration; transportation systems;
Zero Trust; performance benchmarking

Accepted: 10 September 2025
Published: 15 September 2025
Citation: Sousa, A.; Branco, F.; Reis,
A.; Reis, M.J.C.S. A Container-Native
IAM Framework for Secure Green
Mobility: A Case Study with Keycloak
and Kubernetes. Information 2025, 16,
802. https://doi.org/10.3390/
info16090802
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).

Information 2025, 16, 802

1. Introduction
Urban population growth and rising usage of private vehicles have intensified environmental concerns and placed significant strain on transportation infrastructure [1]. In response,
cities are increasingly adopting green mobility strategies such as electric-vehicle sharing and
integrated transit platforms to reduce carbon emissions and promote sustainability.
The choice of green mobility systems as the target domain is motivated by both societal
and technical imperatives. From a societal perspective, urban transportation is one of the
largest contributors to carbon emissions, and the European Union has placed sustainable
mobility at the center of the European Green Deal and the Recovery and Resilience Facility
(RRF). This study was developed under the A-MoVeR project (“Mobilizing Agenda for the
Development of Products & Systems towards an Intelligent and Green Mobility”), which is
funded by the Portuguese Recovery and Resilience Plan (RRP) as part of Next Generation

https://doi.org/10.3390/info16090802

Information 2025, 16, 802

2 of 23

EU. From a technical perspective, mobility ecosystems represent one of the most challenging
application areas for IAM: they combine heterogeneous IoT devices (vehicles, sensors,
smartphones), require low-latency and high-availability authentication, and must safeguard
highly sensitive user data such as location and travel patterns. These characteristics
make green mobility an ideal stress-test environment to validate the scalability, resilience,
and security of IAM solutions.
Concurrently, advances in Internet of Things (IoT) technologies have transformed
multiple sectors, with transportation among the most significantly impacted [2]. Enhanced
wireless communication, protocol standardization, and improved device capabilities have
enabled the creation of interconnected systems at scale [3]. In this context, many European
cities are adopting Mobility as a Service (MaaS) as a framework for rethinking urban
mobility [4].
IoT underpins Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) by enabling real-time communication among vehicles, infrastructure, and users [5]. It supports dynamic traffic management, vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communication, Software-Defined Vehicles (SDV),
and multimodal routing, enhancing both efficiency and user experience [5–7].
For example, IoT-enabled electric-vehicle-sharing systems monitor vehicle health,
optimize routing, and reduce idle time, contributing to smarter and more sustainable
mobility [5]. Furthermore, real-time data from connected devices power adaptive traffic
systems, congestion prediction, and predictive maintenance [8], reducing emissions and
improving overall transportation performance [9].
Beyond technical innovation, the policy and regulatory context also drives the adoption of
secure green mobility. The European Green Deal and United Nations Sustainable Development
Goals emphasize digital infrastructures that are both environmentally efficient and secure.
In this landscape, mobility platforms must simultaneously achieve sustainability objectives,
comply with stringent privacy regulations such as GDPR, and provide trustworthy digital
identity management for millions of heterogeneous devices and users.
Traditional transport systems have often relied on siloed authentication or proprietary
access control. However, modern MaaS and ITS require scalable, interoperable Identity and
Access Management (IAM) solutions that integrate seamlessly across vehicles, charging
infrastructures, and user-facing applications. Cloud-native paradigms—and particularly
container-orchestrated environments like Kubernetes—have emerged as a foundation for
these services, providing elasticity, automated recovery, and strong security primitives.
Keycloak, as an open-source IAM platform, has been widely adopted due to its extensibility,
standards support (OAuth2, OpenID Connect), and ability to integrate with microservice
ecosystems. This combination of Kubernetes and Keycloak provides a unique opportunity
to study container-native IAM architectures in practice.
1.1. Problem Statement
As green mobility ecosystems grow increasingly reliant on IoT, they face mounting
security and performance challenges. The pervasive deployment of connected devices
introduces vulnerabilities such as unauthorized access, data breaches, and denial-of-service
attacks [10,11]. Key challenges are described in Table 1.
Traditional IAM solutions are often unfit for these dynamic environments due to
their limited scalability, rigid access-control models, and lack of resilience. Gateways are
sometimes used to mediate authentication for resource-constrained IoT devices, but without
strong protections, instances of stolen or intercepted credentials can lead to widespread
system compromise [11,12].

Information 2025, 16, 802

3 of 23

Table 1. Key challenges in green mobility ecosystems.

Category

Challenge

Data & Security
Development
Access
Architecture
Availability

Privacy of sensitive user and operational data.
Misconfigurations resulting in vulnerabilities in applications.
Weak AAA (Authentication, Authorization, Auditing) implementations.
Single points of failure that reduce system availability.
Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks that can disrupt services.

Moreover, most existing AAA architectures are conceptual and lack empirical validation under realistic conditions. They rarely address key performance requirements
such as low-latency response, high request throughput, and fault tolerance. These are
essential for real-time mobility services, where downtime can directly affect safety, revenue,
and user trust.
1.2. Contributions
This work presents a validated, container-native architectural blueprint for secure Identity and Access Management (IAM) in green mobility ecosystems. The key contributions of
this study include the following:
•

•

•

•

•

A modular and scalable IAM architecture: We design and implement a Kubernetesorchestrated solution integrating Keycloak and adopting Zero Trust and defensein-depth principles. This modularity enables mobility providers to incrementally
adopt security services, reducing vendor lock-in and improving maintainability as
ecosystems evolve.
A comparative evaluation framework: We introduce a systematic benchmarking
methodology that evaluates scalability, resilience, and operational efficiency. It builds
on the approaches of Vayghan [13] and addresses challenges noted by Yasrab [14].
This framework allows both researchers and practitioners to replicate performance
tests and adapt the methodology to other IAM solutions, fostering the use of more
consistent evaluation standards in the field.
Empirical performance validation: We conduct comprehensive benchmarking, measuring latency, throughput, resource usage, and recovery time under realistic workloads representative of MaaS environments. By providing empirical data, we demonstrate that IAM can meet the stringent performance requirements of safety-critical
mobility applications, improving operator confidence in containerized deployments.
Quantitative comparison to a baseline: The architecture proposed here is evaluated
against a monolithic IAM deployment, demonstrating significant improvements in
performance, resource efficiency, and automated recovery. This comparison highlights the operational benefits of orchestrated IAM, offering decision-makers concrete
evidence to guide migration away from legacy monolithic setups.
Conceptual and operational validation: We offer both empirical data and architecturelevel analysis to establish this blueprint as a new standard for deploying highavailability IAM in complex, IoT-centric mobility platforms. This dual validation
supports both academic research and industrial practice, bridging the gap between
theoretical models and deployable IAM solutions for green mobility ecosystems.

1.3. Document Structure
The remainder of this document is organized into four main sections. Section 2
reviews related work and provides the necessary technical background, including IAM
approaches, security challenges in mobility ecosystems, and containerized deployment
models. Section 3 presents the case-study architecture, describing the system design,

Information 2025, 16, 802

4 of 23

implementation details, and testing procedures. Section 4 discusses the experimental
results, validating the proposed architecture through both comparative and conceptual
analysis. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper and outlines directions for future research.

2. Related Work & Technical Background
This section synthesizes prior research across three core areas: Identity and Access
Management (IAM) in mobility systems, architectural platforms for secure IAM deployment, and the role of containerization in IoT-driven environments. Together, these provide
the foundation and context for the proposed architecture.
2.1. IAM in Urban Mobility Ecosystems
Numerous studies have addressed Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting
(AAA) in urban mobility and related IoT domains. While these efforts offer valuable
insights, few provide empirically validated or production-ready IAM frameworks tailored
for dynamic and heterogeneous mobility ecosystems.
Badii [15] proposed a smart city mobility architecture but did not include a comprehensive security model. Esposito [16] introduced a blockchain-based AAA framework,
highlighting decentralization benefits but encountering scalability and latency limitations;
both of these parameters are critical in real-time mobility contexts.
The Skycloak Team [17] explored the use of Keycloak for IoT IAM but did not include
implementation details. Chatterjee [12] and Gonçalves [1] applied Keycloak to healthcare and agricultural IoT scenarios, respectively, but did not adapt their designs to the
demands of urban mobility. Alam [18] implemented a federated IAM model using Zero
Trust principles but focused on research infrastructure. Santos et al. [8] analyzed IAM in
connected vehicle platforms, noting vulnerabilities in federated login flows and token misuse. Derawi et al. [9] studied MaaS ecosystems, highlighting weaknesses in authorization
mechanisms. Vayghan et al. [13] proposed a performance-evaluation methodology for IAM
solutions but did not include real-world MaaS integration.
This work reveals three persistent gaps in the current state of research. First, there is a
lack of empirical validation: most IAM architectures remain largely conceptual, offering
limited evaluation of performance, resilience, or operational scalability. Second, there is a
limited focus on containerization: few studies investigate IAM within Kubernetes or other
containerized environments; they thus miss crucial insights into latency, failure recovery,
and runtime efficiency. Finally, there is insufficient real-world integration: practical deployment within MaaS or ITS systems is still rare, so studies provide little guidance on
replicability or benchmarking. In summary, while prior work identifies IAM as critical for
IoT and mobility, it rarely couples architectural design with empirical benchmarking under
MaaS-inspired workloads.
This work addresses these gaps by introducing a validated, container-native IAM
architecture using Keycloak that was purpose-built for secure, scalable, and resilient operation in green mobility environments. It advances prior work by delivering a benchmarked
reference implementation that integrates directly with IoT, web, and mobile platforms.
2.2. IAM Architecture Landscape
Modern IAM platforms are designed to centralize authentication and authorization
policies, ensure secure access across distributed systems, and enforce compliance [19,20].
They provide capabilities like SSO, RBAC, MFA, and federation while reducing operational
complexity [21–23].
Commercial Solutions: Auth0 and Okta deliver SaaS IAM with MFA, SSO, and anomaly
detection [24,25]. Gluu supports flexible federation, while IdentityServer offers deep inte-

Information 2025, 16, 802

5 of 23

gration for .NET environments [26,27]. Comparative studies (e.g., [14]) highlight the ease of
integration of commercial platforms but also emphasize vendor lock-in and higher subscription costs.
Open-Source Resources and Emerging Solutions: Keycloak offers OAuth2, OpenID
Connect, LDAP, and social login support [28,29], with extensibility for modern architectures.
JWTs enable stateless token validation, and while native auditing is limited, integration with
SIEMs improves monitoring [30,31]. Alternative open-source platforms, such as Ory Hydra
and Zitadel, provide lightweight token services and strong API integrations, but often
lack user management and federation features, which limits their direct applicability in
MaaS ecosystems.
Decentralized IAM: Blockchain-based IAM introduces self-sovereign identity using
cryptographic proofs and smart contracts [32,33]. However, issues like high latency, regulatory uncertainty, and 51% attack risks limit production use [34–36]. While promising
for privacy-preserving identity, such models are not yet practical for latency-sensitive
MaaS deployments.
Table 2 summarizes these IAM solutions across criteria such as extensibility, scalability,
and integration maturity for urban mobility platforms.
2.3. IAM Deployment in Containerized IoT Environments
Containerization is increasingly the standard for deploying scalable, modular applications. It allows IAM systems like Keycloak to be decoupled, updated, and scaled
independently, enhancing maintainability and operational consistency.
Kubernetes orchestrates containerized services, providing automated deployment,
scaling, healing, and secure configuration. Features like pod autoscaling, rolling updates,
and network policies improve availability and reduce downtime. Istio adds mTLS, observability, and policy enforcement across microservices.
Prior studies such as Mitropoulos et al. [7] show that MaaS traffic is highly bursty,
reinforcing the need for elastic, container-based IAM systems. Other works (e.g., [10,11])
highlight the risks of misconfigured Kubernetes security policies, underlining the importance
of defense-in-depth principles. Despite these challenges, container-native deployments remain
the most promising avenue for achieving scalable and resilient IAM in mobility contexts.
Containerization enhances isolation and CI/CD velocity, but it also introduces several
risks, including the use of vulnerable base images or unverified dependencies, misconfigured RBAC or overly permissive network policies, the absence of runtime security
monitoring, and the inherent complexity of secret management and encrypted storage.
Despite these risks, container-native IAM deployments—especially on Kubernetes—
offer an ideal foundation for secure, adaptive identity services in IoT-based mobility
systems. Figure 1 visualizes this deployment evolution.

Figure 1. Comparison of layered architectures: traditional, virtualized, and containerized environments (adapted from [37]).

Information 2025, 16, 802

6 of 23

Table 2. Comparative Analysis of IAM Solutions.
Feature

Auth0

Okta

Gluu

IdentityServer

Keycloak

Blockchain-Based IAM

Hosting
Customization

Cloud-only (SaaS)
APIs, rules, hooks

Cloud-managed
UI + policy rules

Self-hosted or cloud-ready
Scripting, workflows

Self-hosted/containerized
Themes, login flows, plugins

Decentralized (distributed nodes)
Smart contracts, on-chain policies

Protocol
Support
MFA Support
User Federation
API Integration
Scalability
Cost Model

OAuth2, OIDC,
SAML, WebAuthn
OTP/SMS
Social + LDAP/DB
Extensive APIs
Cloud-native
Freemium

OAuth2, OIDC,
SAML, WS-Fed
TOTP, Okta Verify
Out-of-box providers
SSO + auth APIs
Enterprise-grade SLA
Subscription

OAuth2, UMA, SAML,
FIDO2
OTP, WebAuthn, FIDO2
Configurable connectors
REST + LDAP APIs
Manual HA setup
Free core + support

Self-hosted (.NET)
Deep .NET
extensibility
OAuth2, OIDC,
WS-Fed
Plug-in MFA
Manual setup
.NET-focused APIs
.NET-native scaling
Free (.NET license)

OAuth2, OIDC, LDAP, FIDO2

DIDs, VCs, cryptographic proofs
Wallets, key-pairs
Self-sovereign identity
Ledger APIs, DID resolution
Chain-dependent
Transaction-based (e.g., gas fees)

Ease of Use

Dev-focused docs

Admin UI–oriented

Steep learning curve

Dev-intensive

FIDO2, TOTP
LDAP + social federation
REST APIs + adapters
Kubernetes-native scaling
Open-source (Red Hat support
optional)
Moderate, active community

Crypto-heavy learning curve

Information 2025, 16, 802

7 of 23

3. Case Study
This case study was conducted within the A-MoVeR (Mobilizing Agenda for the
Development of Intelligent Green Mobility Products and Systems) initiative, a Portuguese
program focused on accelerating innovation in green, intelligent mobility. As urban transportation becomes increasingly dependent on IoT-enabled systems, the risk of unauthorized
access, data breaches, and service disruption also rises.
To address these challenges, we designed and implemented a specialized AAA (Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting) framework using Keycloak, an open-source
IAM platform deployed within a Kubernetes-orchestrated container infrastructure. The architecture prioritizes scalability, resilience, and secure integration across distributed applications and IoT workloads. While the framework applies Zero Trust and defense-in-depth
principles, it should be noted that no formal symbolic verification of the authentication
and authorization protocols was performed. Formal verification tools such as ProVerif
or Tamarin could be applied in future work to rigorously analyze the attack surface and
validate security attributes under relevant threat models.
3.1. Framework Architecture
The proposed architecture follows a modular, layered design, with Kubernetes managing containerized components for fault tolerance and horizontal scaling. The core layers,
detailed in Table 3, include the followig:
Table 3. Framework Layers.

Layer

Primary Components

Purpose

Aplication

IoT Devices, Mobile/Web applications,
backend services.

Interface for users.

Integration

Istio, cert-manager, MetalLB.

Secure service mesh management, TLS certificates and load balancer.

IAM

Keycloak, PostgreSQL, SMTP.

Centralized management access and identities.

Access

API Gateway (EMQX para MQTT, middleware JS
for HTTP).

Routing and gateway for services.

Monitoring

Stack ELK, Prometheus, Grafana.

Observability, event logging and performance metrics.

Security principles such as Zero Trust, least privilege, and fail-secure defaults are applied throughout. Data protection follows privacy-by-design principles, which are especially
important given the sensitivity of location and user data [38]. In practice, these principles
were implemented through several concrete configurations. First, all inter-service communication within the Kubernetes cluster is secured via Istio’s mutual TLS (mTLS), ensuring
that only authenticated workloads can exchange data. Second, Keycloak was configured
with short-lived tokens (5 min for access tokens, 30 min for refresh tokens), which reduces
the attack window but slightly increases the frequency of re-authentication events. Third,
role-based access policies (RBAC) were combined with attribute-based rules (ABAC) to balance simplicity in administrative control with flexibility for context-aware decisions. These
measures illustrate the trade-offs between stronger security enforcement and system overhead:
while cryptographic validation and frequent token refresh introduce marginal latency, they
substantially strengthen protection against impersonation and replay attacks.

Information 2025, 16, 802

8 of 23

3.1.1. Authentication and Authorization
Figure 2 illustrates the flow for secure access. Authentication is supported through
multiple mechanisms, including the Authorization Code Flow with PKCE for web and
mobile applications, the Client Credentials Flow for backend services, and the Device
Authorization Flow for constrained devices. Keycloak also supports MFA, SSO, and password policies.

Figure 2. JWT-based access request flow. The client authenticates with the authorization server
(SAuth) to obtain a JWT token (Stage 1). After successful authentication, the token is returned to the
client (Stage 2), which uses it to request access to a protected service (Stage 3). The service validates
the token and grants access to the secure feature (Stage 4).

Authorization is enforced using three complementary models: RBAC (Role-Based
Access Control) for administrative control, PBAC (Policy-Based Access Control) for evaluation of complex rules, and ABAC (Attribute-Based Access Control) for context-aware
decisions. Tokens are issued as signed JWTs and validated locally to ensure resilience,
while federation capabilities extend to SAML, LDAP, and social identity providers such as
Google and Facebook.
3.1.2. Token Lifecycle
The token lifecycle in the proposed architecture comprises four main stages. During the
login stage, clients receive short-lived access and refresh tokens (see Figure 3). In the
authorization stage, access tokens are verified locally for signature, scope, and expiration
(Figure 4). The refresh stage ensures that tokens are proactively renewed when they
approach expiration or triggers re-authentication if necessary. Finally, the auditing stage
logs all events through the ELK stack, while cluster metrics are continuously monitored
with Prometheus and Grafana to maintain observability and security compliance.
3.2. Use Cases
The proposed framework supports three representative use cases within green mobility
ecosystems. First, it enables secure IoT and vehicle integration by authenticating electric
vehicles and connected devices, ensuring that telemetry data and remote control actions
are handled securely. In practice, this could be applied to shared e-scooter or e-bike
fleets, where each vehicle must be authenticated before it can transmit sensor data or
receive unlock commands from the mobility platform. Similarly, electric vehicle (EV)
charging stations can rely on IAM for secure, user-specific authorization of charging
sessions and payment integration. Second, it provides platform administration through

Information 2025, 16, 802

9 of 23

RBAC-based roles, allowing secure management of users, policies, and applications, with all
administrative changes fully logged for auditability. For example, operators of a public
transit authority could be assigned roles that allow them to manage fare-collection systems,
while maintenance contractors would be restricted to device diagnostics and would not
have access to user data. Finally, it supports user mobility services by offering SSO and
federated login capabilities, enabling seamless access to services such as journey planning
and payments while enforcing role-based restrictions to maintain security and data integrity.
Concrete applications include multimodal journey planners in which a commuter uses
a single login to access buses, metro, and bike-sharing; or integrated mobility wallets in
which payment credentials are securely linked to verified user identities.

Figure 3. Authentication flow for token acquisition and identity verification. The user submits
credentials via the login page, which are validated before access is granted and tokens are issued for
session management.

Figure 4. Authorization flow access to a protected resource. The process includes login and token
issuance, token validation, role-based access control, and token renewal. Invalid roles or expired
tokens result in access denial or reauthentication.

3.3. Technologies and Tools
A diverse set of technologies and tools was used to implement and validate the
proposed IAM framework. Table 4 summarizes the main components across different
categories; these range from orchestration and security to monitoring and DevOps practices.
Table 4. Technologies Employed in the Prototype.

Category

Technologies

Orchestration
Security

Kubernetes (1.30), Docker (26.1)
Keycloak (24.0.4), Istio (1.22), cert-manager (1.15)
EMQX (5.7.1), custom JavaScript middleware (ECMAScript 2023 (ES14) Standard)

Gateways

Information 2025, 16, 802

10 of 23

Table 4. Cont.

Category

Technologies

Monitoring

ELK Stack (8.13), Prometheus (2.53), Grafana (11.0)
Ansible (10.0), Helm (3.15), GitLab (17.1), VS Code (1.90),
Android Studio (Koala 2024.1.1)
OAuth 2.0, OpenID Connect (1.0 Standard), MQTT (5.0
Standard), HTTPS (1.3)
JavaScript (ECMAScript 2023 (ES14) Standard), Python
(3.12.4), React (18.3.1), Flutter (3.22)
PostgreSQL (16.3 Standard ), Mailu (2.0)

DevOps
Protocols
Languages/Frameworks
Storage/Email
3.4. Infrastructure Setup

Hosted on Proxmox, the prototype infrastructure consists of four Debian 12 virtual
machines, as illustrated in Figures 5 and 6. The core Kubernetes cluster was deployed across
three VMs, each provisioned with 4 GB of RAM, 2 vCPUs, and a 20 GB disk. In addition,
a separate bike interface node was configured on a lighter VM with 500 MB of RAM, a single
vCPU, and a 10 GB disk. This setup mirrors a realistic IoT-enabled mobility environment
for AAA system validation while enabling clear observability of resource allocation and
performance across the infrastructure. The use of a Proxmox-based VM cluster enabled the
conduction of reproducible experiments under controlled conditions, but it also abstracts
away some aspects of distributed deployments, such as physical network latency between
nodes, cross-availability-zone routing, and storage I/O contention. These factors, which
were not captured in the present study, could introduce additional variability in latency and
recovery times. The resource sizing of 4 GB RAM and 2 vCPUs per cluster node was chosen
to satisfy the minimum production recommendations for both Keycloak and Kubernetes
while preventing memory pressure during load tests. In addition, this configuration
ensured fairness in comparisons with the monolithic baseline, which was provisioned with
equivalent per-node capacity. Overall, the VM-based environment represents a pragmatic
trade-off: it supports controlled benchmarking and reproducibility while maintaining
realistic resource availability for small-to-medium operators. Future work will extend this
evaluation to physical testbeds and cloud-based environments to capture the additional
dimensions of heterogeneity, latency, and large-scale elasticity.

Figure 5. Proxmox dashboard showing the virtualized infrastructure used in the case study.
Three VMs labeled k8s-1, k8s-2, and k8s-3 form the Kubernetes cluster. Additional VMs include
linux-app (IAM client), and OS templates (ubuntu-template, debian-template). Resource usage
for each node is displayed in real time.

Information 2025, 16, 802

11 of 23

Figure 6. High-level design of the virtual infrastructure used for the prototype deployment. The architecture includes a Kubernetes cluster composed of three nodes (Node 1–3) running within virtual
machines, alongside a separate Linux-based application VM. This setup replicates a realistic IoTenabled mobility environment for AAA system validation.

3.5. Prototype Implementation
Deployment of the prototype was fully automated using Ansible, with the Kubernetes
cluster comprising one control node and two worker nodes. The implementation relied
on several core components: for networking, an ingress controller was combined with
MetalLB, Istio, and cert-manager; the API Gateway was provided by EMQX working
alongside a custom middleware layer to proxy HTTPS traffic; observability was ensured
through the ELK Stack, Prometheus, and Grafana; and the IAM services were delivered by
Keycloak integrated with PostgreSQL for data persistence and Mailu for email handling.
Keycloak itself was configured through a sequence of critical steps to establish a secure
and multi-tenant foundation for identity management. This configuration included the
creation of realms for tenant isolation, the registration of secure clients, the definition of
granular roles (as shown in Figure 7), the auditing of token and login events, and the
enforcement of signature and access-scope validation.
To test the framework under realistic conditions, three client applications were developed: a React-based web portal, a Flutter mobile application, and a Python-based IoT
simulator. Each of these applications interacted with the IAM services to validate functionality across different access scenarios. Figures 8–10 illustrate successful authentication and
role-based access in the web, mobile, and command-line applications, respectively.
3.6. Performance Evaluation
We evaluated performance across two distinct environments: a baseline setup consisting of a single VM running Keycloak and PostgreSQL and an orchestrated setup composed
of a three-node Kubernetes cluster hosting the full AAA stack. The technical parameters of
each environment are summarized in Table 5. We selected a monolithic Keycloak baseline
for comparison because it reflects the most common open-source deployment model in
production mobility projects. This choice ensured fairness and reproducibility, as both
environments used the same software stack. While alternative IAM solutions (e.g., Ory
Hydra, Zitadel, Auth0, Okta) were not directly benchmarked, they are included in Table 2
to contextualize the broader ecosystem. A comprehensive multi-platform benchmark is
identified as important future work.

Information 2025, 16, 802

12 of 23

Figure 7. Keycloak administrative interface showing the configuration of realm-level roles within the
web_app realm. Roles such as end_user, fabricante, and vendedordefine fine-grained access control
across different user types. These roles are essential for implementing context-aware and role-based
authorization in the green mobility ecosystem.

Figure 8. Web application demonstrating successful IAM integration using Keycloak. Upon authentication, the user—assigned the fabricante role—is granted access to role-specific UI elements and
receives a signed access token (JWT). The application dynamically renders role-based content and
enables token validation workflows, showcasing the effectiveness of RBAC in the front end.
Table 5. System Configuration for Comparative Analysis.

Parameter

Baseline (Monolithic)

Proposed (Orchestrated)

Deployment Model

Single VM

Three-Node Kubernetes Cluster

Total vCPU
Total RAM
Keycloak Version
PostgreSQL Version
Networking

4 vCPU
8 GB
26.0.7
15.6
Host Networking

6 vCPU (two per worker)
12 GB
26.0.7
15.6 (StatefulSet)
Kubernetes + Istio

Rationale
Evaluate container
orchestration impact.
Ensure balanced CPU resources.
Account for Kubernetes overhead.
Maintain test consistency.
Maintain test consistency.
Assess service mesh impact.

Information 2025, 16, 802

13 of 23

Figure 9. Mobile application demonstrating successful IAM integration with Keycloak. The user authenticates using credentials, receives a signed JWT access token, and is granted UI-level permissions
based on the assigned Vendedor role. The app adapts role-specific functionality and confirms access
rights via a contextual success message.

Figure 10. Linux-based command-line application demonstrating successful IAM token acquisition
and role-based access. After being authenticated via Keycloak, the user receives a JWT token and
gains access to the fabricante feature based on their assigned role.

Information 2025, 16, 802

14 of 23

To simulate realistic MaaS usage patterns, we used Gatling to generate a workload mix
inspired by industry references. The workload consisted predominantly of API-to-API authentication requests for IoT and backend telemetry (80%). It was complemented by user-login
events for web and mobile applications (15%) and token refresh events (5%). These proportions were derived from MaaS industry reports and further adjusted to reflect traffic patterns
observed in pilot projects [7,39]. Because production logs were unavailable, we adopted
conservative assumptions to avoid overstating system performance. While the 80/15/5
distribution is an estimate, it aligns with industry reports and pilot deployments where IoT
traffic dominates authentication requests. Real-world mobility services often experience
bursty demand (e.g., peak commuting, special events) and heterogeneous device behavior.
Although that is not reproduced here, the chosen split provides a conservative baseline. Future
work should extend evaluation with stochastic traffic models and variable latency.
The load profile followed a gradual ramp-up approach, beginning with 10 concurrent
users and scaling to 4000 over a 15-min period, allowing us to identify saturation points
for both architectures. Throughout the tests, we collected metrics in three main categories:
performance (latency—mean, p95, and p99—throughput, and error rate), resource usage
(CPU and memory consumption), and resilience (time to recovery, TTR). In addition to
technical performance, we examined resource expenditure. The orchestrated deployment
required more initial CPU and memory capacity than the monolithic baseline due to
Kubernetes overhead. However, this was offset by elasticity and automated recovery,
which can reduce downtime costs and improve sustainability. Although a full monetary
cost model was outside this study’s scope, our results suggest resource expenditure scales
predictably with workload demand, offering a practical baseline for estimating deployment
costs in green mobility scenarios.
We also conducted fault-injection scenarios to validate the system’s self-healing capabilities. These included simulated pod failures, in which automatic recovery was measured,
and node failures, where Kubernetes rescheduled pods to available nodes.
The detailed Gatling load-testing script, including the full scenario definitions, is
provided in Appendix A.

4. Results & Discussion
To evaluate the overall effectiveness of the solution presented here, we conducted a
comprehensive conceptual and quantitative validation grounded in the existing literature
and empirical performance testing. This dual approach ensures both theoretical soundness
and practical reliability, comparing the architecture presented here to validated patterns
and real-world benchmarks.
Authentication: Support for multiple authentication methods—including SSO, MFA,
and federated login—aligns with the requirements identified by Chatterjee and Prinz [12].
The stateless, JWT-based approach adheres to best practices for distributed environments,
as outlined by Gonçalves [1].
Authorization: The system implements ABAC and PBAC models to enable dynamic,
context-aware access control, consistent with the demands of IoT security described by
Shrestha [40].
Scalability: Through Kubernetes-native horizontal scaling and optimized resource
management, the architecture achieves elastic scalability. This reflects the scalability principles discussed by Kampa and Vayghan [13,41], with database performance emerging as the
primary bottleneck under peak loads.
Resilience: Features such as multi-replica deployment, health probes, and automated
recovery demonstrate the resilience patterns recommended by Kampa and Wong [38,41].

Information 2025, 16, 802

15 of 23

Security: Defense-in-depth, token validation, and secure API gateways address key
vulnerabilities noted by Yasrab, Mullinix, and Subramanian [14,42,43].
Operations: CI/CD automation, observability tools, and configuration-as-code reduce
maintenance overhead and align with the operational best practices proposed by Badii [15].
User Experience: Federated and biometric login support, along with seamless token
renewal, provide a secure yet user-friendly experience [1,12].
4.1. Quantitative Validation
The empirical tests demonstrate strong scalability and resource efficiency. As illustrated in Table 6, the containerized deployment showed superior performance in our load
tests compared to the monolithic baseline.
Table 6. Comparative analysis of the proposed IAM architecture against the baseline (monolithic
Keycloak). Results are reported as mean ± SD, with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) provided
in footnotes.

Metric

Baseline (Monolithic)

Proposed (Kubernetes-Orchestrated)

4.5 ± 0.2 1
3.8 ± 0.2 3
480 ± 40 5
150 ± 12 7

0.75 ± 0.1 2
0.85 ± 0.1 4
2100 ± 95 6
95 ± 9 8

Initial Startup Time (minutes)
Idle Memory Usage (GB)
Peak Throughput (req/s)
p99 Latency at 200 req/s (ms)

1 95% CI: [4.3; 4.7] min. 2 95% CI: [0.65; 0.85] min. 3 95% CI: [3.6; 4.0] GB. 4 95% CI: [0.75; 0.95] GB. 5 95% CI: [447;

513] req/s. 6 95% CI: [2012; 2188] req/s. 7 95% CI: [138; 162] ms. 8 95% CI: [86; 104] ms.

Database performance emerged as the main scalability bottleneck during peak load
testing. PostgreSQL metrics including CPU utilization, I/O wait times, and query rates
were monitored through standard observability tools available in the cluster environment.
As shown in Table 7, under orchestrated conditions PostgreSQL exhibited CPU saturation
above 90% and I/O wait consistently over 30%. These indicators confirmed that the
database layer, rather than the Keycloak application pods or the Kubernetes control plane,
was the limiting factor for further horizontal scaling.
Table 7. Comparative PostgreSQL metrics under peak load for the proposed IAM architecture versus
the baseline (monolithic Keycloak).

Metric
CPU Usage (%)
I/O Wait (%)
Queries per Second
Memory Usage (GB)

Baseline (Monolithic)

Proposed (Kubernetes-Orchestrated)

88
22
850
2.4

92
35
1500
2.8

Performance charts in Figures 11 and 12 show throughput gains and reduced latency.
Self-Healing: Table 8 quantifies recovery times under simulated faults.
Kubernetes’ control plane rapidly detects and corrects failures. In contrast, the baseline
required manual intervention, highlighting the orchestration advantage.
Architectural Impact: PostgreSQL emerged as the main bottleneck. This conclusion
was validated by analyzing resource utilization metrics during peak testing, where the
database server consistently exhibited the highest I/O wait times and the highest CPU
utilization, indicating that optimizing the data persistence layer is a critical step for future
scalability improvements.

Information 2025, 16, 802

16 of 23

Baseline (Single-Node)

Proposed (Kubernetes)

Authentication Latency
8000

Latency (ms)

6000

4000

.6

10 3

.3

10 3

10 2

10 3

.7

.3

10 2

10 2

10 1

0

.7

2000

Concurrent Users
Figure 11. Average authentication latency across varying concurrency levels. The baseline monolithic
deployment shows a steep rise in latency beyond 200 users, while the proposed Kubernetes-based
architecture maintains subsecond response times up to 4000 concurrent users.
Table 8. Resilience Test Results: System Recovery Time (TTR).
Fault Scenario

Detection Method

Recovery Action

Mean Time to Recovery (TTR)

Pod Failure (Orchestrated)

Kubelet Liveness Probe

Controller Manager creates
new pod

52 s

Node Failure (Orchestrated)

Kubelet Heartbeat Timeout

Scheduler reschedules pods

3.5 min

Process Crash (Baseline)

External Monitoring/Manual

Manual restart

>5 min

VM Crash (Baseline)

Hypervisor Alert/Manual

Manual reboot

>10 min

Baseline (Single-Node)

Throughput Comparison

·104

4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1

.6

10 3

.3

10 3

10 3

.7

10 2

.3

10 2

10 1

10 2

0.5
.7

Throughput (requests/sec)

4.5

Proposed (Kubernetes)

Concurrent Users
Figure 12. Throughput comparison under increasing concurrency. The container-orchestrated
Keycloak deployment exhibits near-linear scalability, achieving over 40,000 requests per second at
peak load, while the monolithic baseline saturates early and degrades after 500 users.

Information 2025, 16, 802

17 of 23

4.2. Implications for Green Mobility Ecosystems
The proposed framework has several important implications for green mobility ecosystems. It supports massive IoT scale, enabling telemetry from thousands of devices without
compromising system performance. Its low-latency design ensures real-time interaction,
delivering a fluid user experience even under demanding conditions. The architecture also
provides high availability through automated recovery mechanisms that maintain continuity of safety-critical services. Finally, it offers elastic demand handling, dynamically scaling
resources to accommodate peak loads while maintaining efficiency and stability. From a
cost perspective, this elasticity implies that resources are consumed only when needed,
which can reduce the overall infrastructure expenditure compared to over-provisioned
monolithic deployments. While Kubernetes introduces some baseline overhead, the ability
to scale down during idle periods and recover quickly from failures has direct implications
for both operational costs and environmental sustainability in large-scale mobility services.
Equally important, the container-native design supports long-term maintainability: Kubernetes and Keycloak both allow rolling upgrades, automated patching, and integration with
CI/CD pipelines, ensuring that critical security updates can be applied without disrupting
service availability.
In addition, while this study focused on Keycloak, the design principles demonstrated
container orchestration, elasticity, and zero-trust enforcement are broadly applicable to
other IAM platforms. Conceptual comparisons suggest that open-source systems like Ory
Hydra may offer lighter-weight token services but lack integrated user management, while
commercial platforms like Auth0 and Okta provide robust features at higher financial
and operational costs. This positions the proposed Keycloak-based solution as a balanced
option for mobility providers seeking openness, extensibility, and cost control.
From a security perspective, the trade-offs of the proposed design are noteworthy.
The adoption of mTLS and short-lived tokens imposes additional cryptographic operations,
but these were found to have minimal impact on end-to-end latency while significantly
improving resilience to credential theft and session hijacking. The combination of RBAC
and ABAC allows operators to enforce fine-grained access control but requires careful
policy management to avoid misconfigurations. Overall, the framework demonstrates that
it is possible to integrate advanced security measures into green mobility platforms without
sacrificing usability or performance.
4.3. Threats to Validity
The study is subject to certain threats to validity that should be acknowledged. In terms
of internal validity, the results depend on the specific software versions used in the experiments—namely Keycloak 26.0.7, PostgreSQL 15.6, and Kubernetes 1.28—and newer
releases may yield different behaviors. Regarding external validity, the tests were conducted in a lab-based environment using synthetic workloads; production deployments
with real-world traffic and latency conditions may produce different outcomes. Furthermore, the generalizability of the findings to other IAM systems requires additional testing.
Another limitation is that the security properties of the authentication and authorization
protocols were not formally verified. Tools such asProVerif or Tamarin could be employed
in future work to model adversarial behavior and confirm resistance against replay, impersonation, and man-in-the-middle attacks.
In addition, this work does not include a detailed monetary cost analysis of the
required infrastructure (e.g., cloud service pricing or energy consumption). While we
reported relative differences in resource usage, a full economic assessment is needed in
future work to precisely quantify operational expenditure.

Information 2025, 16, 802

18 of 23

Finally, as the present study primarily follows a descriptive approach, future work
should incorporate hypothesis testing and the calculation of confidence intervals to statistically validate the significance of the observed performance gains.
Another limitation concerns the workload model. The 80/15/5 split used in the
experiments reflects common industry-reported traffic patterns but does not fully capture
the unpredictability of real-world environments, where heterogeneous device behavior
and sudden traffic spikes may occur. Future evaluations should incorporate stochastic or
trace-driven models to assess robustness under dynamic conditions.
An additional limitation stems from the use of a VM-based lab environment on a
single Proxmox host. This configuration ensures reproducibility but does not capture
the effects of geographically distributed clusters, cross-zone latency, or heterogeneous
hardware environments. Consequently, the latency and recovery characteristics reported
here may differ from those observed in production-grade deployments. To address this
gap, future evaluations should include physical or cloud-native infrastructures.
4.4. Strengths of the Prototype
The prototype demonstrates several notable strengths. It offers centralized security control, ensuring unified IAM policy enforcement across all system components. Its
scalability and resilience are supported by autoscaling, self-healing, and load-balancing
mechanisms that guarantee high availability. The design applies layered security measures, combining TLS, an API gateway, and mutual mTLS across services. It also provides
cross-platform access, enabling seamless integration with web, mobile, and embedded
applications. Thanks to its modular architecture, individual layers can be upgraded or
replaced in isolation, while its built-in observability facilitates auditing and forensic analysis. Finally, the framework’s open-source extensibility avoids vendor lock-in and allows
customization for diverse use cases.
In summary, the prototype successfully demonstrates the feasibility of a containernative IAM solution for green mobility platforms. Its robustness, observability, and costefficiency make it a strong candidate for broader adoption in mobility ecosystems.
4.5. Statistical Analysis
To complement the descriptive performance assessment, we conducted a statistical
analysis of the main metrics throughput, latency (p95 and p99), and resource utilization for
both the baseline (monolithic) and orchestrated (Kubernetes) deployments.
Each scenario was executed five independent times under identical load conditions.
Gatling logs were exported and aggregated, and for each metric, we computed the mean,
standard deviation (SD), and 95 % confidence interval (CI) using the Student’s t distribution. For example, peak throughput in the orchestrated deployment averaged 2100 req/s
(SD = 95) with a 95 % CI of [2012 req/s; 2188 req/s]; this can be compared to the baseline’s
480 req/s (SD = 40; 95 % CI [447 req/s; 513 req/s]).
A two-sample t-test assuming unequal variances was applied to the main performance
metrics. Results confirmed that the improvements observed are statistically significant:
throughput (t(6.21) = 28.7, p < 0.001), latency at p99 (t(7.04) = −9.2, p < 0.001), and idle
memory usage (t(5.88) = −11.3, p < 0.001). These tests support the conclusion that the
reported 300 % throughput increase is not due to random variation.
Table 6 now includes SD values (in parentheses), and Figures 11 and 12 have been
updated to display error bars representing 95 % confidence intervals for each measurement
point. Overall, this statistical validation strengthens the claim that the orchestrated architecture provides a robust and reproducible performance gain over the monolithic deployment,

Information 2025, 16, 802

19 of 23

reducing the likelihood that the observed differences are attributable to experimental noise
or outlier runs.

5. Conclusions
This study presented a validated, container-native framework for secure Identity and
Access Management (IAM) in green mobility ecosystems. By leveraging Keycloak within
a Kubernetes-orchestrated environment, the proposed architecture demonstrated clear
improvements in resilience, scalability, and operational efficiency compared to monolithic
deployments. The solution integrates Zero Trust and defense-in-depth principles, applies
layered security across identity, access, and observability components, and was empirically
validated through web, mobile, and IoT use cases. Experimental results showed more
than 300% improved peak throughput, a 75% reduction in idle resource usage, and subminute automated recovery from failures, establishing the framework as a viable blueprint
for secure IAM in MaaS and ITS contexts. These findings contribute both practical insights for mobility operators and methodological advances for researchers studying IAM
performance in IoT-centric environments.
5.1. Future Work
While the prototype is capable of meeting current demands related to green mobility,
several research-and-development opportunities can further enhance its maturity.
5.1.1. Real-World Deployment and Usability Testing
Future work should include benchmarking Keycloak against commercial IAM offerings, such as Auth0 and Okta, as well as decentralized identity models. The system
should also be deployed and evaluated in real-world urban mobility scenarios, taking
into account challenges such as network instability, latency variations, and diverse user
patterns. In addition, gathering qualitative feedback from operational stakeholders would
help refine usability and improve adoption. Finally, future iterations should incorporate
hypothesis testing and the calculation of confidence intervals to statistically validate the
significance of the observed performance gains. We also plan to extend the evaluation
to other open-source platforms, including Ory Hydra and Zitadel, to provide a broader
performance and functionality comparison across IAM alternatives.
5.1.2. Advanced Security Hardening and Resilience
Another key area for future development is the enhancement of security and resilience.
This includes performing formal penetration tests and establishing a routine of continuous security audits. It will also be important to expand Istio’s role to support dynamic
traffic management and implement advanced security policies. Moreover, the design
of offline-capable authentication and authorization mechanisms for edge devices could
extend the framework’s applicability to environments with intermittent connectivity. In
addition, future work should incorporate formal security verification of the authentication
and authorization protocols. Tools such as ProVerif or Tamarin can model adversarial
capabilities and verify essential properties (e.g., secrecy, authenticity, and resistance to
replay or impersonation attacks), thereby complementing the empirical benchmarking with
rigorous protocol analysis. Equally critical is the establishment of long-term maintenance
strategies. Automated CI/CD pipelines, dependency monitoring, and rolling-upgrade policies should be integrated to ensure timely application of security patches, library updates,
and configuration fixes without interrupting system availability. This lifecycle-oriented
approach will help sustain the security posture of the framework over time.

Information 2025, 16, 802

20 of 23

5.1.3. Enhanced Functionality and Integration
Future enhancements should also address functionality and integration. For example,
adaptive authorization mechanisms could be implemented, leveraging context and trust
dynamics to improve security granularity. Maintainability could be improved with the
use of Helm charts and GitOps automation practices. Finally, the potential of hybrid
architectures—linking Keycloak with blockchain-based verifiable credentials—should be
explored, particularly for high-security contexts where decentralized trust is desirable.
5.2. Limitations
Although the proposed framework demonstrates significant improvements in scalability, resilience, and resource efficiency, several limitations should be acknowledged. First,
the evaluation was conducted in a controlled lab environment using synthetic workloads;
production deployments with real-world traffic patterns may reveal additional performance
constraints. Second, while the study applied Zero Trust principles, no formal protocol
verification was carried out—future work should employ symbolic analysis tools such as
ProVerif or Tamarin. Third, the cost analysis was limited to relative resource expenditure;
a detailed economic assessment (e.g., cloud-pricing models and energy consumption) is
required to fully quantify operational costs. Finally, the prototype reflects a snapshot of
specific software versions, and the long-term sustainability of the framework will depend
on continuous updates, security patching, and lifecycle management.
Addressing these areas will support the evolution of this framework into a production
grade IAM solution for scalable, secure, and adaptive mobility systems.
Author Contributions: Software, A.S.; Writing—original draft, A.S.; Writing—review and editing,
M.J.C.S.R.; Supervision, F.B., A.R. and M.J.C.S.R. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This study was developed under the project A-MoVeR—“Mobilizing Agenda for the Development of Products & Systems towards an Intelligent and Green Mobility”, operation n.º 02/C05i01.01/2022.PC646908627-00000069, approved under the terms of the call n.º 02/C05-i01/2022—
Mobilizing Agendas for Business Innovation, financed by European funds provided to Portugal by
the Recovery and Resilience Plan (RRP), in the scope of the European Recovery and Resilience Facility
(RRF), framed in the Next Generation UE, for the period from 2021–2026.
Data Availability Statement: The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made
available by the authors upon reasonable request to the corresponding author.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Appendix A. Gatling Load Test Script (Excerpt)
The code excerpt in Listing 1 illustrates the Gatling scenario used to simulate API-toAPI traffic and user login events. A complete version of the script can be obtained from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request via email.

Information 2025, 16, 802

21 of 23

Listing 1. Excerpt from Gatling simulation script.
class M o b i l i t y I A M S i m u l a t i o n extends Simulation {
val httpProtocol = http
. baseUrl ( " https :// iam - test . example . com " )
. acceptHeader ( " application / json " )
. c o n t e n t T y p e H e a d e r ( " application / json " )
// Define a scenario for API - to - API aut hentic ation
val a pi Au t hS c en ar i o = scenario ( " API Auth entica tion Load " )
. repeat (80) {
exec (
http ( " API Token Request " )
. post ( " / auth / realms / green - mobility / protocol / openid - connect / token " )
. body ( StringBody ( """ { " client_id ": " iot - client " ,
" client_secret ": " secret " ,
" grant_type ": " c l i e n t _ c r e d e n t i a l s " } """ ) )
. check ( status . is (200) )
) . pause (1)
}
// Define a scenario for user login events
val u s e r L o g i n S c e n a r i o = scenario ( " User Login Load " )
. repeat (15) {
exec (
http ( " User Login Request " )
. post ( " / auth / realms / green - mobility / protocol / openid - connect / token " )
. body ( StringBody ( """ { " username ": " testuser " ,
" password ": " testpassword " ,
" grant_type ": " password " ,
" client_id ": " mobile - app " } """ ) )
. check ( status . is (200) )
) . pause (2)
}
// Set up the load profile
setUp (
a pi Au t hS c en ar i o . inject ( rampUsers (3200) during (15 min ) ) ,
u s e r L o g i n S c e n a r i o . inject ( rampUsers (600) during (15 min ) )
) . protocols ( httpProtocol )
}

References
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.

Gonçalves, C.; Sousa, B.; Vuković, M.; Kusek, M. A federated authentication and authorization approach for IoT farming. Internet
Things 2023, 22, 100785. [CrossRef]
Sousa, A.; Martins, H.; Khan, D.; Azevedo, J.; Reis, M.J.C.S. Proposal of a Collaborative System to Foster the Concept of
Mobility as a Service in the Green Mobility Context. In Proceedings of the Distributed Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Special
Sessions I, 21st International Conference; Mehmood, R., Hernández, G., Praça, I., Wikarek, J., Loukanova, R., Monteiro dos Reis, A.,
Skarmeta, A., Lombardi, E., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2025; pp. 217–225.
Cui, Y.; Liu, F.; Jing, X.; Mu, J. Integrating Sensing and Communications for Ubiquitous IoT: Applications, Trends and Challenges.
arXiv 2021, arXiv:2104.11457. [CrossRef]
Antonialli, F.; Gandia, R.M.; Sugano, J.Y.; Nicolaï, I.; de Miranda Neto, A. Business Platforms for Autonomous Vehicles Within
Urban Mobility. WIT Trans. Built Environ. 2019, 186, 175–186. [CrossRef]
Wang, S.; Lehmann, C.; Radeke, R.; Fitzek, F.H.P. Enabling Sustainable Urban Mobility: The Role of 5G Communication in the
Mobilities for EU Project. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2412.04006. [CrossRef]
Shamsuddoha, M.; Kashem, M.A.; Nasir, T. A Review of Transportation 5.0: Advancing Sustainable Mobility Through Intelligent
Technology and Renewable Energy. Future Transp. 2025, 5, 8. [CrossRef]
Mitropoulos, L.; Kortsari, A.; Mizaras, V.; Ayfantopoulou, G. Mobility as a Service (MaaS) Planning and Implementation:
Challenges and Lessons Learned. Future Transp. 2023, 3, 498–518. [CrossRef]
Santos, G.; Nikolaev, N. Mobility as a Service and Public Transport: A Rapid Literature Review and the Case of Moovit.
Sustainability 2021, 13, 3666. [CrossRef]
Derawi, M.; Dalveren, Y.; Cheikh, F.A. Internet-of-Things-Based Smart Transportation Systems for Safer Roads. In Proceedings of
the 2020 IEEE 6th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), New Orleans, LA, USA, 2–16 June 2020; pp. 1–4. [CrossRef]
Ekpo, O.; Casola, V.; De Benedictis, A. Security and Privacy Issues in Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS): A Systematic Review. In
Proceedings of the 2024 19th Annual System of Systems Engineering Conference (SoSE), Tacoma, WA, USA, 23–26 June 2024;
pp. 300–307. [CrossRef]
Garroussi, Z.; Legrain, A.; Gambs, S.; Gautrais, V.; Sansò, B. Data privacy for Mobility as a Service. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2310.10663.
[CrossRef]

Information 2025, 16, 802

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.

31.
32.
33.

34.
35.
36.
37.

22 of 23

Chatterjee, A.; Prinz, A. Applying Spring Security Framework with KeyCloak-Based OAuth2 to Protect Microservice Architecture
APIs: A Case Study. Sensors 2022, 22, 1703. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Vayghan, L.; Saied, M.; Toeroe, M.; Khendek, F. A Kubernetes controller for managing the availability of elastic microservice
based stateful applications. J. Syst. Softw. 2021, 175, 110924. [CrossRef]
Yasrab, R. Mitigating Docker Security Issues. arXiv 2023, arXiv:1804.05039. [CrossRef]
Badii, C.; Bellini, P.; Difino, A.; Nesi, P. Sii-Mobility: An IoT/IoE Architecture to Enhance Smart City Mobility and Transportation
Services. Sensors 2019, 19, 1. [CrossRef]
Esposito, C.; Ficco, M.; Gupta, B.B. Blockchain-based authentication and authorization for smart city applications. Inf. Process.
Manag. 2021, 58, 102468. [CrossRef]
The Skycloak Team. How IoT Devices are Revolutionizing Identity Management. Available online: https://skycloak.io/blog/
how-iot-devices-are-revolutionizing-identity-management/ (accessed on 27 June 2025).
Jain, P. Identity and Access Management in the Cloud. Int. J. Sci. Res. Comput. Sci. Eng. Inf. Technol. 2025, 11, 1528–1535.
[CrossRef]
Rajba, P.; Orzechowski, N.; Rzepka, K.; Szary, P.; Nastaj, D.; Cabaj, K. Identity and Access Management Architecture in the
SILVANUS Project. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, New York, NY,
USA, 30 July–2 August 2024. [CrossRef]
Thakur, M.A.; Gaikwad, R. User identity and Access Management trends in IT infrastructure- an overview. In Proceedings of the
2015 International Conference on Pervasive Computing (ICPC), Pune, India, 8–10 January 2015; pp. 1–4. [CrossRef]
Sharma, D.H.; Dhote, C.; Potey, M.M. Identity and Access Management as Security-as-a-Service from Clouds. Procedia Comput.
Sci. 2016, 79, 170–174. [CrossRef]
Indu, I.; Anand, P.R.; Bhaskar, V. Identity and access management in cloud environment: Mechanisms and challenges. Eng. Sci.
Technol. Int. J. 2018, 21, 574–588. [CrossRef]
Singh, C.; Thakkar, R.; Warraich, J. IAM Identity Access Management—Importance in Maintaining Security Systems within
Organizations. Eur. J. Eng. Technol. Res. 2023, 8, 30–38. [CrossRef]
TekSlate. Okta vs. Auth0: Detailed Comparison. Available online: https://tekslate.com/okta-vs-auth0 (accessed on 19
December 2024).
Okta. Okta: Identity for the Internet. Available online: https://www.okta.com/ (accessed on 20 December 2024).
Gluu. Gluu—Identity and Access Management. 2024. Available online: https://gluu.org/?utm_source=saasworthy.com&utm_
medium=cpc&utm_banner=2998550&sub1=2998550&visitorid=2998550 (accessed on 20 December 2024).
Software, D. IdentityServer—Secure your Apps and APIs. Available online: https://duendesoftware.com/products/
identityserver (accessed on 21 December 2024).
Sersemis, A.; Papadopoulos, A.; Spanos, G.; Lalas, A.; Votis, K.; Tzovaras, D. A Novel Cybersecurity Architecture for IoV
Communication. In Proceedings of the 25th Pan-Hellenic Conference on Informatics, Volos, Greece, 26–28 November 2021;
pp. 357–361. [CrossRef]
Guija, D.; Siddiqui, M.S. Identity and Access Control for micro-services based 5G NFV platforms. In Proceedings of the 13th
International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, Hamburg, Germany, 27–30 August 2018. [CrossRef]
Al Rahat, T.; Feng, Y.; Tian, Y. AuthSaber: Automated Safety Verification of OpenID Connect Programs. In Proceedings of the
2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 14–18 October 2024;
pp. 2949–2962. [CrossRef]
James, M.; Newe, T.; O’Shea, D.; O’Mahony, G.D. Authentication and Authorization in Zero Trust IoT: A Survey. In Proceedings
of the 2024 35th Irish Signals and Systems Conference (ISSC), Belfast, UK, 13–14 June 2024; pp. 1–7. [CrossRef]
Amiri, M.J.; Agrawal, D.; El Abbadi, A. Permissioned Blockchains: Properties, Techniques and Applications. In Proceedings of
the 2021 International Conference on Management of Data, Virtual, 20–25 June 2021; pp. 2813–2820. [CrossRef]
Sciullo, L.; De Marchi, A.; Gigli, L.; Palmirani, M.; Vitali, F. AAA: A blockchain-based architecture for ethical, robust authenticated
anonymity. In Proceedings of the 2024 International Conference on Information Technology for Social Good, Bremen, Germany,
4–6 September 2024; p. 1. [CrossRef]
Jin, X.; Omote, K. An efficient blockchain-based authentication scheme with transferability. PLoS ONE 2024, 19, e0310094.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Alilwit, N. Authentication Based on Blockchain. Ph.D. Thesis, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Daytona Beach, FL, USA,
2020.
Thakur, M. Authentication, Authorization and Accounting with Ethereum Blockchain, 2017. URN:NBN:fi:hulib-201711145693.
Available online: https://helda.helsinki.fi/items/8d0dad04-07f5-4a0d-9ed7-64db26b1e960 (accessed on 3 February 2024).
Kubernetes Documentation. Kubernetes Concepts Overview. 2024. Available online: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/
overview/ (accessed on 3 February 2024).

Information 2025, 16, 802

38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

23 of 23

Wong, A.Y.; Chekole, E.G.; Ochoa, M.; Zhou, J. Threat Modeling and Security Analysis of Containers: A Survey. arXiv 2021,
arXiv:2111.11475. [CrossRef]
MaaS Alliance. MaaS Market Playbook; MaaS Alliance: Brussels, Belgium, 2021. Available online: https://maas-alliance.eu/wpcontent/uploads/sites/7/2021/03/05-MaaS-Alliance-Playbook-FINAL.pdf (accessed on 3 February 2024).
Shrestha, R.; Bertin, E. Access Control for IoT: A Survey of Existing Research, Dynamic Policies and Future Directions. Sensors
2023, 23, 1805. [CrossRef]
Kampa, S. Navigating the Landscape of Kubernetes Security Threats and Challenges. J. Knowl. Learn. Sci. Technol. 2024, 3, 274–281.
[CrossRef]
Mullinix, S.P.; Konomi, E.; Townsend, R.D.; Parizi, R.M. On Security Measures for Containerized Applications Imaged with
Docker. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2008.04814. [CrossRef]
Subramanian, N.; Jeyaraj, A. Recent security challenges in cloud computing. Comput. Electr. Eng. 2018, 71, 28–42. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

